SERVICE TO THE VENERABLE & GOD-BEARING FATHERS

WHO HAVE SHONE FORTH IN FASTING ON MOUNT ATHOS

Which is Celebrated by the Holy Church on the Second Sunday After Pentecost

AT LITTLE VESPERS

At “Lord, I have cried…”, four stichera of the resurrection, from the Octoechos; and Glory…, of the venerable fathers, in Tone I —

O all ye assemblies of monastics, come to the chariot of God, which is adorned with thousands and myriads of the virtues, and let us praise the fathers of Mount Athos: the venerable ones and holy hierarchs, the martyrs and hieromartyrs, those known by name and those whose names are unknown; for by word and deed, by their divers ways of living the angelic life, and by the gifts they received from God, they have truly been revealed as saints, and have shown the Mountain to be rightly named for holiness; and God hath glorified their very graves with miracles and fragrant myrrh. And now, standing before Christ Who hath glorified them, they pray earnestly for us who celebrate their memory.

Now & ever…: The Dogmaticon for Little Vespers, from the Octoechos.

At the Aposticha, one sticheron from the Octoechos, and these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

When ye took the Cross of the Lord upon your shoulders and entered upon the contest of fasting on Athos, and overcame the flesh and the world, and destroyed all the wiles of the prince of this world, then did the multitude of demons cry out to one another with lamentations: “O friends, how our might hath vanished!”

*Stichos:* The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

When certain inhabitants of the Holy Mountain submitted to the Latin-minded and entered into communion with them, thus saving their own lives, then, aflame with zeal for the Faith, O God-bearers, ye rejected their union. Wherefore, having endured death and multifarious tortures, ye have been adorned with the crown of martyrdom.

Glory…, in Tone V —

O blessed multitude of the fathers of Mount Athos, who can praise thee as is meet? For, emulating John the Baptist, Paul of Thebes and Anthony the Great, ye made your abode in the wild and trackless land of Athos, trusting in God Who saveth you; and having struggled with the help of divine grace, ye made your sacred dwellings everywhere on the Mountain and have nurtured a multitude of monastics on the pastures of salvation. And now, deliver us, your flock, from all want, and pray that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

The prophecies concerning thee have been fulfilled, O pure Virgin; for one of the prophets foretold thee to be the gate in Eden which faceth the East, through which no one would pass save the Creator of thee and the whole world; and another foretold thee as the bush burning with fire, which remained unconsumed, in that the Fire of the Godhead abode within thee; and yet another called thee the holy mountain whence the Cornerstone was cut without the aid of men’s hands, which broke asunder the image of the noetic Nebuchadnezzar. Truly great and all-glorious is the mystery manifest in thee, O Mother of God! Wherefore, we glorify thee, for through thee hath salvation come to our souls.

After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace…”, the Troparion of the resurrection; Glory…, the Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone I —

In hymns let us honor the fathers of the wilderness of Athos, the angels in the flesh, the confessors and the venerable, holy hierarchs and martyrs; and, emulating their virtues, let us cry aloud, saying: Glory to Him Who hath glorified you! Glory to Him Who hath crowned you! Glory to Him Who hath shown you to be our intercessors amid tribulations!

Now & ever…: the resurrectional Theotokion, in the same tone —

When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, the Master of all became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, at his cry, as the righteous David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, having given birth to thy Creator. Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who came forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving!

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the entire kathisma.

At “Lord, I have cried…”, 10 stichera: 4 for the resurrection, from the Octoechos; and 6 for the venerable fathers: 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

O assemblies of monastics and laymen, come ye together and hold a splendid festival; for, behold! all the venerable ones who have fasted on Mouth Athos have summoned us all to spiritual joy, setting before us the struggles, sufferings and feats which they undertook in manner transcending nature.

Let us bless as is meet the company of the venerable, the choirs of monastics who shone forth on Mount Athos and have illumined all creation: the truly fragrant flowers, the beautiful trees of the Athonite orchard, unwithering and fruitful, the ever-flowing rivers of spiritual gifts.

As befitteth sons, let us praise our honored fathers: the incorporeal ones in bodies, the godly men, the fiery pillars of Athos, who stand with love and joy around the pure Mother of God, as she was seen in a divine vision.

And 3 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, boast of fasters…” —

Rejoice, O ye multitude of the venerable fathers of Athos, regiment of the Queen of heaven, who by the remembrance of God vanquished all the princes of darkness and cruel authorities, who mortified the flesh and gave life to the spirit, who quenched the burning embers of the passions with the outpouring of your tears! Having attained divine activity, entreat Christ the Lord, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

Rejoice, O ye multitude of the venerable, who, shining forth from the Mountain like beacons and illumining the whole world with the splendors of spiritual gifts and divine virtues, have shown yourselves to be stars of great brilliance, making Athos another heaven and dispelling all the darkness of the demons. O heavenly men and earthly angels, honored habitations of the All-holy Trinity — the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, — entreat Christ the Savior, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

Rejoice, ye multitude of the venerable, storehouses of the virtues, treasuries of humility, sweet workhouses of constant prayer, comely assemblies of meekness, suns of discernment, wellsprings of compunction and twofold love, for God and neighbor: Entreat Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Today the honored celebration of the fathers of Athos, hath shone forth more splendidly than the skies bedecked with stars, illumining the thoughts of those who love the feasts of the Church. Come, then, ye inhabitants of the Holy Mountain, and with hymns of praise let us glorify them, saying: Rejoice, ye who vanquished the incorporeal demons and on earth emulated the angels in your life! Rejoice, inhabitants and citizens of Athos, who pray most mightily for all the world! Rejoice, O our intercessors before God, our manifold benefactors and guardians! Entreat ye the Lord, that our souls find mercy!

Now & ever…: the Dogmaticon in the tone of the Octoechos.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Litia, these stichera —

*In Tone I:* Rejoice in the Lord, O holy Mount Athos, thou noetical and beauteous paradise! For, lo! at the foot thy mountains ever-blooming and fragrant lilies have blossomed forth, and in thy vales and by thy shores trees of goodly foliage have grown up, bringing forth immortal fruits of the Spirit. Wherefore, having gathered both monastics and laymen within thyself, keep gladsome festival, and cry out with thanksgiving to thy Mistress and helper: I magnify thee, O Theotokos, who hast exalted me and given to my children the venerable fathers, by whose supplications they are ever protected and receive great mercy from thy Son.

O venerable fathers, who undertook feats of fasting on this mountain, from your youth ye took up the Cross of the Lord, whereby the world was crucified to you, and ye to the world. For some of you cut yourselves off from it sensibly, and others died in mind thereto. Wherefore, understanding the twofold activity of the Cross, ye made a twofold ascent of the spiritual ladder, by act and vision, and attained the perfection proper to man; and now ye are glorified by Christ in the heavens, for Whom ye also suffered. Beseech Him in behalf of our souls.

*In Tone II:* Come, ye assemblies of monastics, and as is meet let us honor today the memory of the holy fathers; for they established in this uninhabited place sacred monasteries and divers churches, and, as solicitous fathers, have bequeathed to us their teachings and rules as an inheritance. As dutiful sons, O brethren, let us therefore preserve our patrimony intact: let us not permit it to lie idle, like the barren fig-tree, but, looking to the end of our instructors’ life, let us emulate their faith and their struggles, that with them we may receive everlasting good things.

O divinely wise fathers, ye emulated the life of Moses and Elijah in the wilderness, and received their vision of God as is meet; for ye lived on Mount Athos, as on Sinai and Horeb, and were vouchsafed, as far as man is able, to see, not with the sight of your eyes or with the comprehension of your mind, the invisible and incomprehensible God, Whom Moses perceived in the dark cloud of fire and Elijah in the voice of the still, small breeze. And now, contemplating the Trinity in Unity and the Unity in Trinity, not as in the reflection of a glass or in the vision of a dream, but directly, O venerable fathers, pray ye in behalf of our souls.

*In Tone III:* Let us praise the fathers of Athos, who are like a lyre with four strings, comprising the venerable, the holy hierarchs, the confessors and martyrs; for, as servants, they kept the commandments to escape punishment; as hired laborers, they cultivated the virtues out of zeal for promised rewards; and, afire with the desire for Him, as sons by grace they pleased God. And now, having become heirs of God in the heavens and co-heirs with Christ, they pray for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone IV —

Come ye, let us bless today the annual commemoration of the God-bearing fathers on Athos. In that they all truly trod the paths of the Lord to blessedness. For, having impoverished themselves in spirit, they have become rich in the kingdom of heaven; having been meek, they have inherited the land of the meek; having wept, they have been comforted; having hungered for righteousness, they have been filled; and having been merciful, they have found mercy; pure of heart, they have seen God, as far as such is possible; having acted as peace-makers, they have been counted worthy of divine adoption; persecuted and tortured for the sake of righteousness and piety, they now rejoice and are glad in the heavens, and earnestly entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

In thy mercy, O Lady, cease not to care for thy servants, who with faith come beneath thy mighty protection; and help and save us all, that we may continually glorify thee, the Mother of compassions, who sendest down great mercy upon the faithful.

On the Aposticha, the stichera of the resurrection in the tone of the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Who can recount your struggles, O most blessed fathers? Who can worthily praise your fasting, the vigilant soaring aloft of your mind in unceasing prayers, the irresistible call of your conscience to the virtues, your mortification of the flesh, your war against the passions, your standing all night, your ever-flowing tears, your humble-mindedness, and your victories over the demons, the multitudes of your spiritual gifts, how ye stood firmly for piety in the face of all, even to the shedding of your blood and to death? Wherefore, O ever-memorable ones, ye have been crowned as victors by Christ. Pray ye earnestly for us who honor your holy memory with faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant…”, the troparion: “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice…”, twice; and the troparion of the venerable fathers, once, in Tone I —

In hymns let us honor the fathers of the wilderness of Athos, the angels in the flesh, the confessors and the venerable, holy hierarchs and martyrs; and, emulating their virtues, let us cry aloud, saying: Glory to Him who hath glorified you! Glory to Him Who hath crowned you! Glory to Him Who hath shown you to be our intercessors amid tribulations!

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the resurrection, twice; Glory…: the troparion of the venerable fathers; Now & ever…: the theotokion: “When Gabriel announced to thee: ‘Rejoice!’…”

After the kathismata of the Psalter, the resurrectional sessional hymns, with their refrains and theotokia.

After the Polyeleos, this magnification —

We bless you, O venerable fathers of Athos, who fasted on that mountain, and we honor your holy memory, O instructors of monks and conversors with the angels.

Selected Psalm Verses —

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Then the Evlogitaria: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord… The council of angels…; Hypacoï of the tone, and these sessional hymns of the saints —

In Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

Having shone forth like the morning star, the precious memory of the fathers of Athos illumineth the inhabitants of that mountain like the radiant sun and warmeth the hearts of monastics, inspiring them to emulate their life of asceticism and zeal for the faith of Christ.

In Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…” —

How beauteous is your company, O thrice-blessed fathers! It delighteth the hearts of the faithful and maketh spiritually glad the assemblies of monastics of the Holy Mountain. Pray for us, we entreat you, O saints, that we may be delivered from misfortunes and sorrows, from every evil circumstance and from everlasting torment which is to come.

Glory…, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom of the Word…” —

Loving the God of all with all their soul, the fathers who fasted on Athos offered up their spiritual struggles in solitude; and, fervently loving their neighbor, they erected honorable temples in divers places on that mountain, wherein assembling multitudes of laymen, they made of the Holy Mountain a city. To them, therefore, let us cry out: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who honor your holy memory with love.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Thy Son, O Virgin, is Christ, the Son of God, the only Mediator for all Christians. And thou, O all-pure one, art a Mother most sweet and a helper for those who dwell on the Holy Mountain; for thou didst receive it from thy Son as thy portion. Wherefore, take pity on us, thy faithful children and servants, O Mistress, beseeching thy Son and our God, that He grant us remission of the transgressions we have committed in word, deed and thought.

Song of Ascents of the tone of the Octoechos. Prokimenon of the tone.

“Let every breath praise the Lord…”

Resurrectional Gospel.

“Having beheld the resurrection of Christ…” Psalm 50. Glory…: Through the prayers of the apostles… Now & ever…: Through the prayers of the Theotokos… Have mercy on me, O God… Jesus having risen from the tomb…

Canon of the resurrection, with 4 troparia, including its irmos; canon of the Theotokos, with 2 troparia; and 2 canons of the saints, with a total of 8 troparia —

Ode I

Canon I of All Saints of Mount Athos,

in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

O God of all, grant the gift of eloquence unto me, Thy servant, who now begin to praise in hymns the fathers who shone forth on Mount Athos and did Thy will.

With hymns let us honor the holy assembly of the fathers of Athos, the friends of the all-holy Virgin and loving favorites of Christ God, our fervent intercessors who pray continually for the salvation of our souls.

In hymns I honor Athanasius the Great, the sacred founder of the Great Lavra, the model and standard for the fathers on Athos, both in appearance and in deed.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O all-holy Lady, who hast hallowed Athos by thy coming! Rejoice, thou who cast down the idols in that place! Rejoice, thou who didst plant the true Faith on the mountain! Rejoice, thou who didst from thence drive unbelief away!

Canon II of All Saints of Mount Athos, in Tone I —

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

I must needs praise the glorious Agapius of Vatopedi, who heard the voice of the Theotokos, who toiled in slavery and delivered his master and his sons, in that he is free of everlasting torment.

I praise the life of Athanasius, the comely scion of the Monastery of Simonopetra, and the godly Acacius the New; and the venerable Gabriel of Iveron, who drew forth from the sea the miraculous icon of the Portaïtissa.

*Glory…:* How can I not honor the honorable Gennadius, who in Vatopedi manifestly beheld the oil which flowed forth through the miracle of the Mother of God? And how can I remain silent concerning the God-bearing George? For they are the founders of the Monastery of Iveron.

Now & ever…, *Theotokion:* When God divided the nations according to the number of his angels, then He foresaw that thou, O Virgin, wouldst be His all-pure Mother, and He set the great Mount Athos apart for thee as an inalienable inheritance.

Katavasia: I shall open my mouth…

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

O venerable fathers of Athos, who struggled by means of grace divine, ye founded sacred folds on the mountain and, with the help of the Mother of God, nurtured multitudes of monastics in the meadows of salvation. Pray ye now for us, your flock, that we be delivered from all want, and that our souls be saved.

I hymn Gregory Palamas, who hath been revealed as a great theologian and a sacred instrument of the Holy Spirit, the beholder of the never-waning light, the true instructor of the faithful in theology.

Meet it is also to praise the other Gregory, who fasted splendidly in the environs of the Lavra, and the other Gregory, his namesake, who raised up the most lauded monastery which beareth his name.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou who chose Mount Athos as thy portion! Rejoice, thou whose will it hath been to be the helper of that place! Rejoice, bestower of earthly blessings upon the faithful who abide there! Rejoice, surety of their eternal salvation!

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

The Monastery of Simonopetra put forth Damian as a shoot, and the Monastery of Philotheou gave rise to another Damian, the martyred monk, and with him the godly Dometius. Let us call them blessed.

I hymn the wondrous Dionysius, who founded the Monastery of John the Baptist, and Dometius, the fellow faster of Dionysius.

*Glory…:* Another Dionysius, the scion of Iveron, and Damascene, the divine adornment of the Lavra, are now blessed, for they have received twofold crowns, for suffering and for fasting.

Now & ever…, *Theotokion:* Thou, O all-pure Virgin, hast promised ever to fight with all who on Mount Athos contend against the adversary who wageth war on men. Wherefore, O Mistress, mindful of thy promise, forsake us not, we beseech thee.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “O Thou Who wast of Thine own will lifted up on the Cross…” —

Come ye, let us all praise the fathers who have made Mount Athos a heaven, who have shown forth therein an angelic life, and have assembled a multitude of monks; and let us cry out unto them: deliver us from every misfortune and temptation, O ye multitude of the venerable, boast of Athos.

*Ikos:* O how goodly is your unity, O divinely wise fathers! O how comely and sweet is this your festival, whereon all of you, the saints who have shone forth on the Mountain, both known and nameless, receive our general praise as a spiritual brotherhood; for it is fitting to celebrate on a single day those who pleased the Lord in a single place. Wherefore, having assembled together, both monastics and layfolk, as new children of the fathers of old we call you blessed as is meet, crying out together: From all evil save the place wherein ye lived, O ye multitude of the venerable, boast of Athos.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…: —

All the armies of the angels together were stricken with awe, beholding your valor of soul and contest, which transcend nature, O fathers who bore the sign of the Cross: how, clad in a material body, ye vanquished incorporeal foes and in thanksgiving chanted a hymn to the Lord: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee Who hast strengthened the mortal nature of men! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Every mind is filled with awe at Thy love for mankind, O Mary Theotokos, which thou didst show to the monastic ranks who fasted on Mount Athos. For thou didst gather them from throughout the earth unto that great mountain, and didst entrust it to the monks as thine own inheritance. Truly great is thy forethought for us, O Ever-virgin!

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Loving God with all your soul, O venerable ones, ye performed great feats of asceticism; and, likewise loving your neighbor, ye raised up monasteries in divers places on Athos and assembled multitudes of cœnobites therein. Wherefore, pray ye, O solicitous fathers, and be ye full of love for us, that our souls may be saved.

With hymns I honor Euthymius, the abbot of Vatopedi, who was bound with chains and plunged into the depths of the sea, but denounced the intentions of the Latin-minded and hath received from the hand of the Lord the imperishable crown of martyrdom.

I also hymn another honorable Euthymius, the founder of the Monastery of Iveron, for while he was once serving God, he was seen by those with him to be a pillar bright as the sun. And I praise yet another venerable Euthymius, the founder of Dochiariou.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O fervent mediatress for those who live within thy portion! Rejoice, thou who hast promised to that place the mercy of thy Son until the end of time! Rejoice, thou who hast foretold that His grace would never be removed therefrom! Rejoice, O joy and salvation of our souls!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Meet it is to praise the honored and faithful ministers of the Trinity: Theodosius, the abbot of the Monastery of Philotheou, and Theophanes the faster, the divine adornment of the Monastery of Dochiariou, and the exceeding wise Theoleptus of Philadelphia.

How can I leave without praise Theonas, the luminary of the Monastery of Pantocrator, who was later hierarch of Thessalonica? And how can I fail to praise in words Theophilus the myrrh-gusher, who emitteth a fragrance sweeter than any perfume?

*Glory…:* Let us praise the founder of the sacred Monastery of Iveron, the venerable John, the father of Euthymius according to the flesh; and with him let us also hymn the steadfast monks martyred for Christ, the divinely wise James and another James, the scions of Iveron.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* How great is thy forethought for Mount Athos, O Mistress! For thou didst say that thou wilt be an instructor and teacher in the virtues for all who live virtuously thereon, and a nurturer and physician for their bodies and souls.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

O venerable fathers of Athos, like sweetly singing nightingales dwelling amid the groves of the Holy Mountain ye learned ever to utter the saving name of Jesus, illumining your mind with light divine, and delighting your hearts with the joy which floweth therefrom. By your supplications grant this also unto us who keep your memory.

I praise in song the venerable Joasaph of the Monastery of Dionysiou, for, rejoicing, he shed his blood for love of Christ the King of all, and received a crown of martyrdom.

It is truly fitting to praise in hymns the great Callixtus, the wise and divinely inspired instrument of grace, the adornment and glorious pastor of the Monastery of Iveron.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Virgin, for through thy blessing the power of the Most High hath overshadowed the mountain! Rejoice, thou who by the grace of God hast planted a spiritual garden in the midst of thine inheritance! Rejoice, for its valleys and groves have been filled with monks! Rejoice, for there hath shone forth on Athos a multitude of the venerable, who pray for the salvation of our souls!

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

Let the venerable Cosmas, the excellent scion of the Monastery of Zographou, be honored in hymns, who beheld the Theotokos with his own eyes; and with him let the martyred priest Constantius, who lived at the Lavra, be likewise honored.

And do thou also rejoice in the Lord, O Monastery of Koutloumousiou, for within thine environs blossomed forth the great Cyprian, the martyred monk and priest of Christ.

*Glory…:* The Monastery of Dionysiou rejoiceth in its children like a mother, and it praiseth the honorable new martyr Macarius and Leontius, who hath most gloriously poured forth a fragrant myrrh from his grave.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Who doth not rejoice, hearing of thy promise, O all-immaculate Maiden? For thou hast said that thou shalt intercede before thy son and God for those who live well on the Holy Mountain, asking for them forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

O venerable fathers of Athos, performing many and divers feats of asceticism ye thereby soared aloft from that mountain to the mountains of heaven; and establishing your dwelling-place there, ye have now found rest for your souls, like golden and all-comely doves. There be ye also mindful of us who praise you.

With hymns let us honor the sacred child of the Lavra, the God-bearing Maximus, who received from the divine Spirit the rich gift of prophecy.

I honor the divine offshoots of the Monastery of Vatopedi: the glorious Neophytus, who heard the voice of the pure divine Maiden, and Nicodemus, who hath shone forth among the venerable.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, for thou ever regardest thine inheritance! Rejoice, for thou dost vouchsafe it the grace of God and thine own mercy! Rejoice, thou who dost establish the hearts of thy servants upon the rock of the commandments of Christ! Rejoice, thou who bringeth down the blessing of thy Son upon us!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

Be thou hymned as is meet, O wondrous Niphont, excellent adornment of the Monastery of Dionysiou, who wast the shepherd of Constantinople and paragon of all the venerable.

Be glad, O honored Monastery of Dochiariou, who hast been enriched by a glorious founder, the wise Neophytus, who, like a fruitful tree, was replete with every virtue.

*Glory…:* O Karyes, center of asceticism, be thou also glad in the divine Spirit, having given rise to the glorious Nectarius, the sweetest nectar of the virtues, who abode with the venerable.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Protected by thine alliance, as with mighty armor, O Theotokos, the venerable ones of Mount Athos have vanquished all the forces of the demons and have received the trophy of victory.

Kontakion & ikos of the resurrection

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O venerable fathers who shone forth on Athos, like stars of great brilliance ye illumine that mountain with beams of the virtues and divine gifts, and have shown the site of your spiritual struggles to be a second heaven, having dispelled the foul darkness of the demons. Cease ye never to pray for us to the Lord.

The God-bearing Niphont was shown to be one of the saints on Athos who dwelt like a bird within the environs of the Lavra and hath received from God the gift of prophecy.

Nilus, the myrrh-gusher of the Lavra, and Nicodemus, the flower of Kavsokalyvia, the new martyr beloved of Christ, are praised in songs and hymns as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O most compassionate one, who bestowest all gifts upon thy servants! Rejoice, thou who art their all-merciful consoler amid battle, pangs and toils! Rejoice, thou who arrangest for them a long life on earth and a most blessed one in the heavens! Rejoice, thou hope and salvation of our souls!

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

How can I not honor among the choir of the divine fathers the valiant Nicephorus, who lived in spiritual stillness in the wilderness and was worthily vouchsafed spiritual gifts?

Let Paul, the founder of two monasteries — Grigoriou and Xeropotamou — the ornament of fasters, who shone forth in his repose like another sun, be praised in hymns.

*Glory…:* I chant a hymn unto Pachomius, the divine offshoot of Kavsokalyvia, the new martyr of Christ, who hath receive a twofold crown from the hand of the Lord.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Thou art the Mistress of the world, O Ever-virgin, and even more art thou the Mistress and intercessor of Mount Athos, saving it from all trials and misfortunes.

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O inhabitants and protectors of Athos, our intercessors after the Theotokos, great and manifold benefactors and instructors, pillars of fire who stand with love and joy around the Mother of the Light: Cease ye never to pray for us to the Lord.

Peter is praised, the first to dwell in seclusion on Athos, who lived an immaterial life and in the flesh drove away incorporeal demons, who went about naked all his life and was richly granted the gifts of the Holy Spirit, through the prayers of the Theotokos.

In hymns let us honor the glorious Romanus, the adornment of fasters and joy of the martyrs of Christ, whom the Lavra, that center of asceticism, put forth like a fragrant rose.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O our protectress in this present age! Rejoice, our intercessor and sure hope in that which is to come! Rejoice, thou who grantest entry there to every good man! Rejoice, thou who dost repel the assault of every evil from thy portion.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Let the divine hierarch Savva be praised, who received from Christ the power to work miracles and shone upon the land of Serbia like the sun, together with Symeon, his father according to the flesh and son in the Spirit, who hath poured forth a fragrant myrrh from his tomb; for they are the founders of the divine Monastery of Chilandar.

With hymns let us honor Symeon, the excellent instructor of the Monastery of Philotheou, and Simon the myrrh-gusher, who by the guidance of the stars of heaven erected a most lofty monastery on a rock and received from God the power to work miracles and authority over unclean spirits.

We bless the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit: the Lord:

Leap up and dance, O honored Monastery of Dionysiou, who hast given rise to the godly Philotheos, the adornment of fasters, whom Mary the Theotokos delivered from prison, and whose precious head hath shone forth like the sun.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Thou hast shown thyself seated upon an exalted and splendid throne, O Mistress, shedding thy light upon all; and countless choirs of monks, the fathers who are now being praised, stood round about thee in the sunny environs of Athos and around the Holy Mountain, and were shown to be pillars of fire.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

O venerable fathers of Athos, regiment of the Queen of heaven, who with her help have vanquished the princes of darkness, have mortified the flesh, have revived the spirit and received the divine activity of grace: Cease ye never to pray for us to the Lord!

Rejoice, honored Monastery of Vatopedi, who art enriched by the twelve martyred monks who courageously denounced the Latin-minded Emperor Michael and Patriarch John! For they were given over to death by hanging and have received twofold crowns from God.

Be glad, O honored Monastery of Iveron, for thou hast offered many of thy children to God as martyred monks, who were cast into the depths of the sea because they denounced with valiant mind the heresy of the Latin-minded.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou by whom all the monasteries of the mountain are protected! Rejoice, thou by whom all the snares of the enemy are destroyed! Rejoice, thou who movest thy Son to compassion for us! Rejoice, thou through whom thy servants have acquired boldness before Him!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Leap up and rejoice also, thou Monastery of Zographou, who hast offered to the Lord thy sons, the twenty-four godly martyred monks, who valorously put to shame the machinations of the Latin-minded, and whose lives were ended in fire like a sacred immolation.

And thou, O Karyes, honored center of fasting, dance now and rejoice, for thou also hast offered to Christ thy children, the steadfast martyred monks, who were beheaded by the sword because they defended the dogmas of the fathers and set at nought the falsehood of the Latins.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* O most Holy and worshipful Trinity, accept those whom Mount Athos offereth to Thee as chosen firstfruits, who have been pleasing unto Thee in times past and in the latter days, known by name or unknown; and through their supplications keep us all from all harm.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* All those who dwell on Mount Athos offer thee hymns of thanksgiving, O Mother of God, for thou dost ever save them from every evil circumstance, and dost nurture, care and take thought for them. And we beseech thee: Vouchsafe also unto us the kingdom of God at the hour of our repose.

Exapostilarion of the resurrection.

Glory…: Exapostilarion of all saints of Athos: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

Rejoice, O glorious Mount Athos, who hast as intercessors the God-bearing fathers who shone forth on thee! And celebrating their joyous festival with thine inhabitants, honor thou the council of thy saints!

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Rejoice, O Ever-virgin, seeing the fulfillment of thy prophecy that Mount Athos would become holy! For the fathers who struggled in asceticism thereon, whom we honor today, have truly been shown to be saints, sealing thy prophecy in deed, O Maiden.

On the Praises, 8 stichera: 4 for the resurrection, and 4 for the saints of Athos, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

Come, all ye who dwell on Athos, let us praise with hymns the honored assembly of the fathers of Athos, the loving favorites of God, our intercessors and unceasing mediators before the Lord.

O venerable fathers, who dwelt on Mount Athos in the body, ye have lifted up your mind wholly to the noetic and eternal mountains and have truly dwelt on earth like the immaterial angels.

*Stichos:* The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

For the sake of your extreme humility and concern for things divine, O fathers, through the grace of the Spirit ye truly received foreknowledge and foresight from God. Wherefore, ye foretold and manifestly spake of things of the future as though they were in the present.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the Church of the saints.

Illumined now by the unapproachable glory of the all-radiant Trinity, O God-bearing fathers, and filled with divine gladness and joy, O glorious ones, pray ye earnestly in our behalf, that we may be delivered from everlasting torment.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

The choir of the venerable fathers, who came from many lands and made their abode on Mount Athos, hath been vouchsafed spiritual gifts by the Lord and hath shown us the way of asceticism in word and deed. Wherefore, praising them well as is meet, let us cry out: O sanctified multitude of the venerable, beloved of God! O divinely assembled garden of the bees who, in the clefts and caves of the mountain, as in noetic hives, have stored up the sweetest honey of spiritual stillness and have spiritually offered fragrant incense upon the altar of heaven! O boast of Athos and melodious instruments of the glory of God: Pray ye to the Lord, that our souls find mercy!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone II: Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos…

Great Doxology. Resurrectional troparion alone. Litanies and dismissal.

Evangelical sticheron. First Hour

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 10 troparia: 6 for the resurrection, from the tone of the Octoechos; and 4 for all saints of Athos, from Ode III of their first canon.

After the entrance, troparion of the resurrection; troparion of the temple, if dedicated to the Theotokos; troparion of all saints of Athos; kontakion of the resurrection; Glory…: kontakion of all saints of Athos; Now & ever…: kontakion of the temple, if dedicated to the Theotokos; if not: O unashamed intercession for Christians…

Prokimenon of the resurrection, according to the tone of the Octoechos; and that of the saints, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Epistle of the Sunday; and that of the saints:

Gal §213 \[5:22-6:2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia of the tone of the Octoechos; and that of the saints, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Gospel of the Sunday, and that of the saints:

Luke § 24: \[6:17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up his eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in the heavens.”

Communion Verses —

Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

