THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST

Commemoration of All the New Martyrs of Christ,

Who Have Suffered since the Fall of Constantinople

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone II; and Glory…, in the same tone —

Now doth the Church celebrate, adorned with the blood of the new martyrs as with new raiment of purple and fine linen; and, offering it to Christ as a pure and right acceptable sacrifice, she crieth out to Him with boldness: O Thou Who hast crowned and glorified them, send down rich mercy upon those who keep their honored memory with love!

Now & ever…: dogmaticon of Little Vespers, in Tone II

At the aposticha, 1 sticheron of the Resurrection, in Tone II; and these stichera, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

O right victorious martyrs, new confirmation of the Church, boast of the faithful, confounding of the Moslems, who fulfilled the words of the Savior in your deeds and manifestly portrayed His sufferings in yourselves by undergoing multifarious tortures for His sake: Pray ye for the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

Following in the footsteps of the martyrs of old, ye struggled steadfastly for the sake of the Faith in these latter days, O glorious passion-bearers, and move all to glorify and praise God, Who strengthened your weak nature and enriched you with the gifts of the Spirit, unto the salvation of our souls.

Glory…, in the same tone —

O Master Most High, Who art glorified and worshipped in the Trinity: take pity on us through the right acceptable entreaties of Thy new martyrs, who in the presence of the tyrants boldly proclaimed Thee to be the one true God of all, O Son of God, and Thine ineffable incarnation from the Virgin Mother, which saveth those who confess it.

After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart…”, Trisagion through Our Father, and the troparion of the Resurrection; Glory…, that of the new martyrs, in Tone III —

The new martyrs, who with unremitting battle have cast down the ancient deception, have exalted the Faith of the Orthodox; for, having abolished the worship of the iniquitous and professed Christ boldly, they now unceasingly entreat Him as perfect God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: theotokion, in the same tone —

We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, O Virgin Theotokos; for thy Son and our God, accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh He had received of thee, hath delivered us from corruption, in that He loveth mankind.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the full kathisma.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 10 stichera: 3 of the Resurrection and 1 of Anatolius, in Tone II; and 6 of the new martyrs — In Tone I:

O all-glorious wonder! In these latter times martyrs shine forth and dispel the gloom of falsehood; now the Christian Faith is exalted and ungodliness declineth; the faithful rejoice and hold festival for the newly manifest, chanting to Christ God: Thou art the boast and victory of the martyrs, O Almighty!

O Thy wonders, O Christ! Men’s feeble nature hath triumphed over the principalities and powers of darkness; the newly revealed passion-bearers are numbered with the martyrs of old for their steadfast confession of the Faith, their valiant endurance of tortures, and their signs and wonders. Wherefore, in them we cry to Thee: Thou art the boast and victory of the athletes, O Almighty!

United by love for Christ, O right victorious new martyrs, and having Him dwelling within you, ye suffered for Christ, and Christ suffered in you and through you, as the Head of the Church through its members. Wherefore, your precious relics have become release from sickness for those who venerate them with faith. We cry out to Him Who strengthened you: Thou art the boast and victory of the passion-bearers, O Almighty!

*In Tone IV:* Let us come together today, O ye faithful, and celebrate a festival in common; for, lo! new martyrs have appeared among our race, who have boldly preached the Orthodox Faith and denounced the evil-minded descendents of Hagar of old.

With sacred hymnody let us praise the valiant new martyrs: the preservers of the Truth and destroyers of falsehood, who glorified Christ in their members and bore His precious wounds, who were a spectacle for angels and men, the fullness of the faithful.

Standing in the heavens before the Chief of the martyrs together with those who suffered before for His sake, O forbearing athletes, ye have adorned yourselves with glory like unto theirs. Wherefore, as ye have boldness, ask peace and great mercy for us.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Today have all the martyrs of Christ who were slain in many places since the fall of Constantinople been shown forth in the firmament of the Church as newly manifest stars. O ye who love the martyrs, calling them blessed, let us say to them as is meet: Rejoice, confirmation of piety and silencing of impiety! Rejoice, glory of the Church of the East and shame of the heterodox! Rejoice, ye models of patience and suffering for Christ! Stand noetically in our midst, O invincible ones, delivering us from tribulations and temptations, and pray for the salvation of our souls.

Now & ever…: the dogmaticon, in Tone II —

The shadow of the law passed away when grace arrived; for, as the bush wrapped in flame did not burn, so the Virgin gave birth and yet remained a Virgin. In place of the pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth. Instead of Moses, Christ is come, the salvation of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day.

Three Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth? Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am he: before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning: and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of a helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right- aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera —

*In Tone I:* With gladness rejoice in God, O Church of the East! Rejoice and dance, O chosen bride of Christ, clasping to thy bosom thy martyrs new and old; and cry out to Christ thy Bridegroom: “Behold, here am I and the children which Thou hast given me, O Lord, whom I have spiritually begotten through thy grace and nourished with the milk of piety, and whom I have shown to be perfect martyrs for Thy name. Accept their blood as a right acceptable sacrifice, and, showing mercy, free me from the slavery which oppresseth me and from every heresy, for Thou hast redeemed me with Thy precious blood.”

*In Tone IV:* Kings and priests of God have ye become, as is written, O sacred new martyrs, through your steadfast suffering: kings, in that ye gained dominion over the passions of the flesh, the world and the prince of this world; and priests, in that ye presented yourselves to God as an unblemished sacrifice and a sacred wholeburnt offering. And now, standing in the heavens before Christ, the King of kings and High Priest, pray ye for the salvation of our souls.

*In Tone V:* Rejoice, ye multitude of new martyrs, adornment of the Orthodox, newly slain lambs, champions and preservers of the Faith, unashamed mediators for us before God, emulators in these latter years of the first martyrs, unshakable towers of endurance! Beg ye great mercy for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

The heavenly mansions of the saints possess your souls, O martyrs who suffered greatly; and we on earth, possessing your holy relics, are full of joy, drawing forth sanctification and healing of soul and body therefrom. Glory to Thee, O Lord, Who, even in our generation, hast shown forth passion-bearers for the confirmation of the Faith, the consolation of those held captive, and the salvation of our souls!

Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone —

O new wonder greater than all the wonders of the past! For who hath ever known a mother to give birth without having known a man, and to bear on her arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? Yet it was the will of God to be born. O all-pure one, who bore Him in thine arms as an infant and hast maternal boldness before Him: Cease not to pray in behalf of those who honor thee, that He have compassion and save our souls.

At the aposticha, the stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone II; and Glory…, in Tone IV —

Today hath the noetic spring broken forth amid the winter of a captivity in suffering, composed of scores and scores of new martyrs, those known by name, and others whose names are unknown. Wherefore, come ye who love their feast, and, entering into the sight of their right laudable struggles as into a garden burgeoning with blossoms, let us sweeten the senses of our souls; for there we shall see all manner of fragrant flowers, which never wither and are stained with blood. And, praying to Christ, let us cry out: O Master Who hast planted them in Thy Church like roses, through their right acceptable prayers vouchsafe unto us the everlasting springtime of Thy kingdom, in that Thou lovest mankind!

Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone —

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us that call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

After the blessing of the loaves, we chant: “O Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, twice; and the troparion of the new martyrs, once, in Tone III —

The new martyrs, who with unremitting battle have cast down the ancient deception, have exalted the Faith of the Orthodox; for, having abolished the worship of the iniquitous and professed Christ boldly, they now unceasingly entreat Him as perfect God, that He grant us great mercy.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the resurrection, twice; Glory…, that of the new martyrs; Now & ever…: the resurrectional theotokion in the same tone.

After the kathismata, the sessional hymns of the resurrection, in the tone of the week, with their stichoi & theotokia.

After the Polyeleos, this magnification —

We magnify you, O all ye new martyrs of the Church of the East, and we honor your holy memory; for ye entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[45:2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[45:2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[45:3\]

B O God, Who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent neither be still, O God. \[82:2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and those who hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[82:3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[82:4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[78:2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[78:2\]

A They have poured out their blood like ­water. \[78:3\]

B For Thy sake were we slain all the day long. \[43:23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[43:23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[43:15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[72:14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[65:11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[65:12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye ­righteous. \[31:11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[13:5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[36:18\]

A The righteous cried and the Lord heard them. \[33:18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[96:11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[111:6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[15:3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[67:36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[91:13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[63:11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[63:11\]

Glory..., Now and ever... Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Then, the troparia \[eulogitaria\]: “The assembly of the angels…”

The hypacoï of the tone, and these sessional hymns of the new martyrs —

*In Tone II:* O most valiant martyrs, ye new and right glorious army assembled by God from many places and cities, who suffered lawfully and have been crowned by Christ: Pray for us, that we who honor your holy memory with love may be delivered from every cruel circumstance.

*In Tone IV:* Ye shone forth upon the ends of the earth amid the darkness of slavery like the radiant sun, O sacred passion-bearers; for, illumining the faithful, ye warm them with divine love, and, like strong anchors, ye fix timid hearts firmly in the Faith amid the raging waves of life’s tempest.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

The choirs of the angels and multitudes of the Orthodox marvelled at your courage, O athletes. How, suffering in your bodies of clay, did ye vanquish the immaterial foe? And with thanksgiving for you they hymn the all-holy Trinity Who hath revealed martyrs in these latter years.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Thou art a microcosm of the great world of the Creator, O Mary, the crown of things divine which hath been foretold, the depiction of the primal Majesty, the ever-flowing wellspring pouring forth grace upon those who hymn thee with love.

Hymns of Ascent, in Tone II. Resurrectional prokimenon, in Tone II. Let every breath praise the Lord. Gospel III of the Resurrection. Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ…; Psalm 50; Glory…: Through the prayers of the apostles…; Now & ever…: Through the prayers of the Theotokos…; Have mercy upon me, O God…; Jesus having risen from the tomb…

Canon of the Resurrection, with 4 troparia, including the irmos; that of the Theotokos, with 2 troparia; and that of the new martyrs, with 8 troparia, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

O threefold Unity, three-Sunned Unity: Enlighten my darkened mind and illumine mine impure tongue, that in writing I may worthily hymn by name Thy sacred new ­martyrs.

Forming a spiritual choir, O ye faithful, with hymns let us honor the glorious passion-bearers, the beacons of the Church, who illumine the hearts of those who with faith and love keep their memory.

Let us render timely praise to the glorious Angelus, and to Athanasius of Attallius, the priest of the Almighty; and let us also hymn his compatriot Athanasius, with Anastasius the Bulgarian.

Let Athanasius, the right lauded adornment of Nicæa, Acacius, the ornament of Athos, Alexander and Athanasius, scions of Thessalonica, Anastasius, the glorious boast of Nauplius, and Akhmet Kalpha, be honored today.

With the streams of your blood, O athletes, ye drowned the invisible enemies, by the victorious right hand of Christ Who drowned the ancient tyrant in the roiling waters.

In years in which the fire of love for Christ was extinguished, ye appeared, O valiant passion-bearers, like the protomartyrs Stephen and Thecla. Wherefore, pray ye that a new fire be instilled in hearts which have waxed cold.

Illumined with the light of the three-Sunned Godhead together with the choirs of the ancient martyrs, O new martyrs, by your intercession send down enlightenment upon those who hymn you.

*Theotokion:* O thou who art full of grace, first among all thou art full of all spiritual gifts, receiving them from the all-holy Trinity and distributing them among the faithful; and through them the most lauded Aquilina and the all-wondrous Argyra struggled even to the shedding of their blood.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Let Anastasius, the most honored priest, be hymned, and the steadfast Anthony, the boast of the Athenians. May Anastasius of Ancyra be blessed, and Auxentius, the scion of Vellas.

I hymn Gabriel of Byzantium, the glorious hierarch Gabriel of Serbia, Gabriel the martyred monk, and George; and with them George of Philadelphia.

With hymns of praise I honor George the Cypriote and another all-wise George; and I hymn the right wondrous George who suffered lawfully in Magnesia.

Possessed of adoption by grace, O most lauded passion-bearers, ye rejected the adoption of the Moslems and spurned all their honors and pleasures, that ye might gain Christ alone.

“Boast not, O tyrants, and speak not lofty things in your pride,” the new victors cried to the Moslems, “for the Lord God of wisdom maketh His adversaries weak!”

Wondrous is the dominion of Thy might, O Christ! For, behold! this present, enfeebled generation, armed with Thy Cross, hath been girded about with Thy power, as of old, and hath vanquished the ancient foe who is mighty in malice.

O Trinity our God, through the supplications of Thy new martyrs exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, and make them steadfast, granting them victory over the enemy.

*Theotokion:* We glorify thee, O joyous Virgin Mother of God; and we hymn thee, the holy and all-pure one chosen from among all generations, who hast been shown to be a new heaven, more exalted than the heavens, O most hymned one.

Kontakion of the new martyrs, in Tone I —

Rejoice mystically, O Church of Christ, beholding thy children, the new martyrs, standing round about thy table in their relics, like newly planted olive shoots; and cry aloud to the Creator of all: Thou art the confirmation of the martyrs, O Christ!

*Ikos:* O brethren, we must ever and in all things be prepared for the inscrutable judgments of God’s providence concerning us, not least for lengthy captivity by the tyrants who have become the cause of many spiritual benefits for us, and because of whom and through whom rightly glorious, lovely and worthy fruit of the granary of heaven hath sprung forth for Christ: the newly manifest martyrs who now stand before us for glorification. For, being steadfast in wisdom and protected by the power of Christ, they considered all the sweet things of this life to be but dung, and went forth into the arena of suffering. Wherefore, having cast down the ungodliness of the Moslems and proclaimed the Christian Faith with boldness, for its sake they manfully endured multifarious tortures to the end and have received crowns of martyrdom, crying out to Him Who hath crowned them: Thou art the confirmation of martyrs, O Christ!

Sessional hymn of the new martyrs, in Tone V —

O warriors of Christ, your holy relics are a wondrous infirmary, an animate display of our Orthodox Faith, a coffer of miracles rich in myrrh, a vessel of heavenly fragrances surpassing the sweet scent of earthly perfumes. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who honor you, O new martyrs.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Thou wast the divinely inscribed scroll of Isaiah, O Mary, the animate tabernacle of Moses and the strong rampart of Amos, the golden lamp-stand of Zachariah, the unquarried mountain of Daniel and the transcendent proclamation of the prophets. O Theotokos, ask thou forgiveness of debts for us who glorify thy birthgiving.

Ode IV

Irmos: Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Rejoicing, the hieromartyr Damascene struggled for Christ, and like a rose the new Demetrius, the adornment of Philadelphia, blossomed forth; and with them Demetrius Demos the journeyman, who suffered in Smyrna and hath wrought many miracles.

Damascene, Damian and the godly Dionysius have been vouchsafed martyrs’ crowns, and Doukas of Lesbos hath been glorified in his endurance, receiving trophies of victory with the martyr Demetrius of Byzantium.

With hymns I honor Euthymius who was nurtured on Athos, Zachariah, archpastor of Corinth, and Zosimas of Iveron, and with them I glorify the other Zachariah, from Arta, and Elijah Ardounes: the glorious new martyrs of Christ.

A cedar firm and unshaken despite the winds of torture was the new Theodore, the adornment of Byzantium, shown to be, and with him the other Theodore, of Lesbos, Theophanes, the boast of monastics, and Theophilus of Chios.

That ye might obtain everlasting life and the glory of the early martyrs, ye considered transitory life and glory to be as nought, O right victorious ones, and, burning with love for Christ, for His sake ye steadfastly endured all manner of torments.

Dragged to the slaughter, the passion-bearers cried out to the Moslems: “We have confessed Christ God to you and have denounced your falsehood! For what iniquity do ye desire to slay us? Yet shall ye behold us resplendent in the glory of heaven!”

Full of spiritual waters, O glorious martyrs, ye have been shown to be rivers of living water by the hand of the life-creating Trinity, from Whom send ye down upon those who hymn you peace, health and salvation.

*Theotokion:* In that thou hast great and unfathomable boldness before the all-holy Trinity which surpasseth that of all the saints, O Mistress, pray for us, thy servants who glorify thee with reverence, that we be delivered from all grievous circumstances.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Let every tongue glorify the martyred monk James, his deacon James, the initiate of the mysteries, and Ignatius, the adornments of Athos, and Jordan, the boast of Trebizond, who have glorified Christ in their sufferings.

Who will not perforce bless the godly John, the comely scion of Ioannina, and John, the glorious adornment of Sostavia, and with them the splendid John Koulikas?

Let John the carpenter, the boast of Byzantium, be honored with hymns, and let John the tailor, the offspring of Thasos, be lauded, and John of Wallachia: three martyrs who are namesakes of grace.

Like the thirsting deer of the Psalms, O new passion-bearers, ye hastened to the wellsprings of martyrdom, crying out to the tyrants: “Wherefore delay ye in torturing us? For we desire to be with Christ!”

Like blood-thirsty wolves the tribe of Ishmael fell upon you, O most praised lambs of God, and devised all manner of tortures to separate you from the love of Christ.

The waves of torment which burst forth through the rage of the ungodly were unable to drown the ship of your souls, O right glorious ones, before ye entered the harbor of the kingdom of heaven.

Let us hymn the Godhead in three Hypostases, Who hath given us as intercessors the holy new martyrs, who move Him to mercy for those who honor their memory.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Ever-virgin, thou golden censer of noetic fragrances, wherein Christ, the heavenly Incense, hath been placed, Who perfumeth those who have recourse unto thee, O Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

John the ship-owner is truly worthy of great hymnody, as is the steadfast youth John, who showed himself to be another Maccabee through the grace of God. And with them let John, the boast of Bulgaria, be likewise hymned.

The venerable Joasaph suffered, and with him Joseph of Syria struggled lawfully, as did the glorious Cosmas, the divine preacher of grace, who is adorned with a twofold crown.

All praise appertaineth to the most chaste Kyranna, and to the venerable Cyprian who also endure torture; and hieromonk Constantius the Russian is worthy of laudation.

O wondrous passion-bearers, Christ hath multiplied you in His Church like cedars unbroken by tortures, and by His grace He hath made your souls white beyond all earthly whiteness.

Like roses and lilies ye blossomed forth in the courts of the Lord, O most honored athletes, perfuming those who faithfully call upon you with the sweet fragrance of your struggles.

In the midst of the winter of captivity ye showed yourselves to be like blossoms of narcissus and hyacinth, O ye who are blessed of God, and with your sweet fragrance ye gladden the spiritual senses of those who kiss your relics.

Mercifully regard the entreaty of Thine unworthy servants, O Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and of Thine omnipotent aid deprive us not who honor Thy new martyrs, but rescue us from sufferings and temptations.

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee to be a powerful helper, O thou who art most good, we offer thee supplication with all our soul: Attend and hearken unto us, O Mistress, and deliver thy servants from the wrath and vengeance of God.

Kontakion & ikos of the Resurrection, in Tone II.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

With hymns and songs I praise the martyred monk Macarius, Macarius of Chios, and Mark of Crete, and with him Myron, the radiant star of that same island.

Let us send up praise to Manuel of Crete, Michael the scion of Athens, and the other Michael, from Granitsa, for they theologized gloriously concerning the Trinity.

Let Michael of Vourla and Nicetas of Nisiros be praised, and the priest Nicetas of the Russian monastery on Athos, and Nicodemus, venerable among the martyrs, who struggled in the Monastery of Meteora.

Truly the enemy, who boasted that he would overturn the earth and the sea, was utterly vanquished by you; for, having Christ within you, O invincible ones, ye trampled him beneath your feet.

O most blessed passion-bearers, the Lord tried you like gold in the fire of torments, and hath received you as a rich wholeburnt offering, showing you to share in His own sufferings.

To the Moslems ye preached God the Lord, for Whom ye most zealously accepted tortures, O athletes. Him do ye entreat, that we be freed from everlasting torments.

Offering praise to the consubstantial Trinity, O martyrs, never cease to ask for us a pure heart and upright spirit, that we may chant in purity: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be the daughter of God the Father, O Mary, the Mother of the Son, O Ever-virgin, and the Bride of the Holy Spirit, O all-pure one, thou ­dwelling-place of the Trinity, the Origin of light, thou animate temple of the whole Godhead.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Who will not offer praise to Nicodemus, the venerable martyr who beareth a staff in his hand, and to the valiant Nicholas, the offspring of Cappadocia, who suffered for Christ in Smyrna, and to the other Nicholas, from the village of Metsovon?

Let Nicholas of Karpenesia be praised, who suffered in Byzantium, and with him Nicholas the scion of Byzantidas; and let Nicholas, the great boast of Chios, be justly crowned, for he hailed therefrom and suffered there.

I magnify Parthenius of Constantinople, the comely scion of Mytilene, and with him I honor the former apostate Paul the Russian with sacred hymns; and I hymn the venerable Pachomius, and the godly Panaghiotes of Cæsaria.

Blessing the choir of the new passion-bearers of the Lord, O ye assembly of those who love the martyrs, let us cry out to them: Pray ye, that we may be delivered from all tribulation and condemnation, who cry: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Following in the footsteps of the ancient martyrs, ye struggled steadfastly for the Faith in these present times, O right victorious ones, and move all to cry out to Him Who strengthened you: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Looking down from above upon those who celebrate your memory, O glorious crown-bearers, mediate with the Most High Bestower of gifts, that He grant temporal and everlasting good things unto us who cry: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

When yours heads were cut off, O most honored new martyrs, ye were united more closely to the Head of the Church, Christ alone, the Bestower of life, crying out to Him, and to the Father and the Spirit: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* A new Adam hath been born in place of the first Adam — thy Son, O Virgin. And thou, O all-pure Mother, standest in the place of Eve. Instead of Eden, of which our forefather was deprived, heaven hath been opened; and instead of the grief of our first mother joy was announced to thee, O Theotokos.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Like a star the luminous Polydorus of Cyprus shineth forth among the new martyrs, and the martyred monk Romanus adorneth the choir of passion-bearers, as doth Romanus, the priest and martyr, who hath received a twofold crown from the Lord.

The steadfast Sabbas Nigelis and Seraphim, hierarch of Phanar, rejoice with the new martyrs of Christ; and with them Symeon of Trebizond and the godly Stamatius of Volos continually join chorus.

The number of the new martyrs hath been increased by Triandaphyllus the seaman, Christos the gardener, who showed himself to be a right profitable servant of Christ, Christodoulus, the new servant of Christ and boast of Albania, and the virgin Zlata, the adornment of Bulgaria.

The incorporeal choirs of the angels rejoiced in your martyrdom for Christ, O right glorious ­passion-bearers, and the sacred ranks of the martyrs joyously welcomed you to the mansions of heaven.

When the gates of heaven opened to you, the Master of all made you to dwell in the mansions of His Father with those who endured suffering for Him in the past, O ye of valorous mind; and He hath caused you to share in His glory. There be ye mindful of those who commemorate you.

O new council of athletes, ye heavenly chain wrought of gold and various in form, O sacred wreath woven of flowers, ye most lauded ones: Accept this supplication, and with others whose names are unknown to us ever offer entreaty for us to God.

O our God in three Hypostases, Who hast accepted the struggles of Thy new martyrs and all-gloriously crowned them: Through their intercession save Thy servants and vouchsafe that we may eternally glorify Thy dominion.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, take to thy Son the sacred new martyrs, those we have commemorated by name and those whose names we know not, and pray with them, that, delivered from the fire which burneth without light, we may be counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven.

Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; and, Glory…: exapostilarion of the new martyrs —

O Thou Who art worshipped in Trinity, accept the new martyrs whom a captive people bringeth to Thee as perfect offerings, as fragrant roses, as incense of sweet savor, as myrrh of great price; and grant us freedom and the forgiveness of all transgressions.

Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion.

On the Praises, 8 stichera: 4 stichera of the resurrection, in Tone II; and 4 stichera of the new martyrs, in the same tone —

Come, all ye who love the martyrs, let us hymn the new martyrs of Christ, for in these latter days they have been shown to be the glory and confirmation of the Orthodox Faith, our fervent intercessors, the physicians of the infirm and the consolation of the sorrowful, and they pray that we be saved.

Come, ye choirs of incorporeal beings, and celebrate with us fleshly beings on the honored feast of the passion-bearers; for, likewise vested in weak bodies, they struggled for Christ’s sake like incorporeal ones, ignoring the cruel torments; and pray ye with them, that we be saved.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Come, ye multitudes of martyrs, greet ye one another now: Ye ancient martyrs, welcome the new; ye who bear names, welcome your namesakes; ye who suffered particular torments, welcome those who have emulated you. And rejoice all together in the ineffable glory of heaven, praying that we be saved.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O newly assembled choir of three choruses, composed of hieromartyrs, martyred monastics and martyrs! Who can praise your passion-bearing struggles worthily? For, at various times and in divers places, ye all armed yourselves against the single ungodliness of Islam, and endured multifarious tortures for the one true Faith. And now, dancing together in the heavens, pray ye that we be saved.

Glory…: Evangelical sticheron.

Now & ever…: Theotokion: “All-blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos…”

Great Doxology. And after the Trisagion & Our Father, the resurrectional troparion alone. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes: 10 troparia: 6 for the Resurrection; and the last 4 troparia of Ode III of the canon of the new martyrs.

Resurrectional prokimenon, in Tone II; and this prokimenon of the new martyrs, in Tone VII —

For Thy sake, O Lord, we are slain all the day long.

Epistle to the Romans, §88 \[5:1-10\]

\(for the 3rd Sunday of Pentecost\)

Epistle to the Romans, §99 \[8: 28-39\]

Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to His purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, those He also called: and whom He called, those He also justified: and whom He justified, those He also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? It is God Who justifieth. Who is he who condemneth? It is Christ Who died, yea rather, Who is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of God, Who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written: For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Resurrectional Alleluia, in Tone II; and that of new martyrs, in Tone IV —

The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them; and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

Gospel according to Matthew, §18 \[6: 22-33\]

\(for the 3rd Sunday of Pentecost\)

Gospel according to Luke, §106 \[21:12-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men: they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

Communion Verses —

Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

