The 4th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have…”, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside …” —

Thou wast shown to be a God-bearer wholly consecrated, the holy anointed of God, clad in the Holy Spirit, ever entering with splendor into the holy of holies, illumined with godly radiance, partaking of the grace of the holy mysteries as a true and all-glorious hierarch, praying with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Thy life was illumined with the radiance of the virtues, and thou hast enlightened the faithful and driven away the darkness of falsehood; for thou wast shown to be the bright sun of the truth, O all-blessed and holy hierarch Metrophanes. And now thou hast made thine abode where shineth never-waning light, having become a child of the day through the grace of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, honorably celebrating thy divine and luminous memory, we honor thee with love, O ever-memorable one.

Thy mind made beautiful by faith and through yearning for God, O divine wise one, thou wast shown to be radiant; and having learned incorruption in thy mortal and corruptible body, O all-wise one, thou didst acquire the splendors of the incorporeal ones, becoming a stranger to pleasures, adorned with dispassion, O all-wise father and hierarch Metrophanes, thou radiant lamp and intercessor for those who honor thy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the law! Rejoice, O temple of the Holy Trinity, thou incorrupt Bride! Rejoice, divine chariot of the King of all! Rejoice, thou who like tongs held the Ember of immaterial fire in thine arms, O new paradise, garden enclosed, divine and all-radiant table, undefiled dove, throne of the Most High, noetic bower of God, whom the Holy Spirit covered, O Maiden!

Stavrotheotokion —

Of old, when the unblemished ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried aloud: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that the ungrateful assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemneth Thee, the Life of all, to death? Yet do I hymn, O Word, Thine ineffable condescension.”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility and riches through poverty. O father and hierarch Metrophanes, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Both canons from the Octoechos, and this canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I sing the glory of the great Metrophanes”, in Tone VI —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Standing with the heavenly choirs as a holy hierarch and servant of God, pray thou earnestly for us, that by thy supplications we may receive eternal good things.

Chosen to serve the precious Gospel of the Lord, O blessed father Metrophanes, with thine all-wise teachings thou didst cause men to grow in goodly understanding.

Enriched with the understanding of God, thou didst pour forth the word of life from thy heart, watering souls hardened by the passions, O all-wise and divine blessed Metrophanes, hierarch of God.

*Theotokion:* From afar the sacred choir of the prophets revealed thee as the one who would become the true Mother of God, O pure one who art more exalted than the cherubim and all creation.

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Letting divine sweetness fall from thy lips, O father, thou didst dry up the outpouring of bitter godlessness, giving the pious the understanding of God to drink, O blessed one.

Chosen beforehand by the judgment of God, O holy hierarch father Metrophanes, thou wast shown to be a hierarch, offering unbloody sacrifices to God Who was sacrificed for our sake.

The tomb where thy precious body lieth poureth forth sweet fragrance as if it were the garden of God, perfuming the faithful, O all-glorious and most honorable Metrophanes.

*Theotokion:* The human mind is at a loss how to understand the ineffable depths of thy birthgiving, O pure one; for, abasing Himself in His compassion, within thy womb God hath wholly restored me.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

Thou didst manifestly preach the Faith of Christ, and preserving it, thou didst truly cause thy faithful flock to grow into a multitude. Wherefore, thou dost rejoice with the angels, O Metrophanes, entreating Christ unceasingly for us all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel,: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having gained dominion over the carnal passions, thou didst show thyself to be a godly hierarch, O venerable and divinely inspired one, and didst most gloriously shepherd the imperial city, fending off the hordes of heretics with the staff of thy divine words. Wherefore, after thine end thou hast worthily inherited infinite grace, O blessed and holy hierarch, for which cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy most precious memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having fallen into greatly tangled perils from enemies visible and invisible, and been beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, O pure one, I flee to the haven of thy goodness as to my fervent help and protection; wherefore, O all-pure one, earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly praise thee, ever beseeching Him, O all-pure Theotokos, to grant remission of offenses unto those who fittingly hymn thy glory.

Stavrotheotokion —

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Full of the Holy Spirit, O sacred father Metrophanes, thou didst drive evil spirits away from men, and by thy spiritual teachings hast rendered them faithful.

Thou didst theologize concerning the uncreated Unity indivisible in three Persons, inseparable and unconfused, illumining the pious with thy sacred theology.

Having first mortified carnal thoughts by asceticism and labors, thou didst show thyself to be a godly hierarch and a most sacred intercessor before the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O all-pure Mother of God, hath the curse of our first mother been annulled, for thou gavest birth for us to the Wellspring of holiness, to Life everlasting.

Ode V

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Performing the divine mysteries in godly manner and touching pure things with most pure thoughts, serving God thou wast shown to be immaculate, as a most sacred hierarch of God.

Adherents of idolatry became favorites of God through thine honored teachings; and in removing them from unworthy things, thou didst show thyself to be a worthy favorite of God Almighty.

Called by grace, thou didst destroy the ungodliness of idolatry, O venerable, and with the rain of thy discourses thou didst render stony hearts fruitful through the grace of God.

*Theotokion:* After thy strange birthgiving thou didst remain a virgin as thou wast before; for God was born, transforming all things by His will, O Mary, Bride of God who knewest not man.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thy tongue wisely sharpened by the Spirit like the pen of a scribe, thou didst inscribe the word of grace upon the hearts of the pious at the behest of God, O most sacred father.

Learning things divine as one who entereth the mystic holy of holies, with the radiance of the Trinity and by the Spirit thou renderest men faithful, O sacred father, most perfect Metrophanes.

Pushing back the turgid commands of the impious with the streams of thy precepts, thou wast shown to be like a river of peace, watering the congregations of the faithful with piety, O most honored and holy hierarch.

*Theotokion:* The Word made His abode within thy womb without seed and revealed Himself as perfect man, restoring nature in godly manner, as He alone knew how to do, O God-receiving and most immaculate Maiden.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…” —

From childhood thou wast shown to be a precious vessel, becoming a chosen hierarch of God; and to Him thou hast cried out with gladness: O Christ, Thou art equal to the Father and the Spirit!

*Ikos:* Such a high priest, an initiate and minister of the Word, befitted us — as the divine Paul, the instrument of Christ, crieth out — ever offering service to God as one blameless and honorable. And though seen to be clad in a corrupt body, he converseth in his service with the incorporeal ones, removing the offenses of the people with a just scale. And now, as a great hierarch, Metrophanes hath appeared unto us, preaching with boldness: O Christ, Thou art equal to the Father and the Spirit.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Illumined with the grace of the Spirit and by sharing in the will of God, thou becamest a radiant star, O wise one, enlightening those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

As a most holy temple made splendid by virtuous deeds, thou didst have the uncreated Trinity dwelling within thee, O sacred one, and didst cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Driving slumber from thine eyes with divine wakefulness, thou didst receive from an angel of light the effulgence of God, which made thee a pillar and support of the faithful, a true holy hierarch.

*Theotokion:* The Uncircumscribable One Who sitteth in the bosom of the Father, O all-pure one, now sitteth, circumscribed, in thy bosom, clad in thy visage, having become circumscribed for the salvation of Adam.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Thou didst bring low the prideful serpent by thy humility, O blessed one, being elevated to God by thy pure understanding. Wherefore, we honor thee, exalting Christ supremely forever.

Thou didst theologize concerning the incarnate Word, and didst save men from slavery to falsehood, driving away the ungodliness of idolatry, O hierarch father Metrophanes, all-wise God-bearer.

Having a life like unto that of thy Master, and discourse befitting such a life, thou hast passed over to places of rest on high, O father, full of the spiritual days.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the primal curse by thy birthgiving, O all-blessed and divinely joyous Maiden, we address to thee the cry of Gabriel: Rejoice, thou cause of the salvation of all!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

As one meek and innocent thou hast made thine abode in the land of the meek, O holy hierarch, joining the armies of heaven, wholly adorned with the splendors of the virtues and clad in the light of virtue.

Thou beholdest the splendors of God and the angels, and the beauties of the patriarchs, martyrs and apostles, with them entreating Him Who loveth mankind, that He grant remission of sins and amendment of life unto us who praise thee, O venerable one.

Thou didst first splendidly adorn the throne of the foremost of all cities, having lived therein like an angel and adorned it with thy hierarchy; and anointing, thou hast sanctified the people, rendering them divinely wise.

*Theotokion:* Like a heavenly rain God descended into thy womb, O Virgin, and hath dried up the torrents of falsehood and rained down incorruption upon all men. And through thee, O divinely joyous one, hath deliverance been granted.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

We know thee to be a greatly radiant star of the Church, O holy hierarch Metrophanes; for with the council thou didst cast down the blasphemy of Arius, illumining the Church with Orthodox doctrines. Wherefore, we hymn thee with faith.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Virgin who gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the transcendent Word, the Physician of souls and bodies: Heal thou the cruel and chronic infection and wounds of my soul, and ease the pangs of my heart.

