The 5th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyre

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord…” —

Thou wast shown to be the tablet of the Spirit of God, O divinely blessed father, bearing the doctrines of God graven upon thy divine mind; and in disclosing them thou didst illumine those who languished in ignorance. Wherefore, by thy supplications, O father, ask thou great mercy for us all.

Having dyed thy priestly raiment in the streams of thy divine blood, O Dorotheus, thou hast now entered, rejoicing, into the temple of heaven, to appear before our God, Who bestoweth crowns upon those who have suffered. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He send down great mercy upon all.

Angelic was thy life and splendid thy martyrdom, for which thou was counted worthy to dance in joy with the angels, O father Dorotheus, illumining the land with divine miracles and teachings. Wherefore, in thine entreaties ask God to grant great mercy unto all.

If Alleluia be chanted instead of “God is the Lord…”, the following stichera for the Theotokos are chanted before the foregoing stichera of the saint, but in the same tone & melody —

O Mistress, wrest me from the hands of the serpent, the slayer of mankind, who warreth against me with deceit, that he might slay me utterly. Crush his jaws and destroy his wiles, I pray, that, delivered from his talons, I may magnify thy power.

O most immaculate one, I am a barren tree devoid of the fruit of salvation, and for this cause I tremble at the thought of being cut down, lest I be cast into the unquenchable fire, wretch that I am. Wherefore, I fall down before thee, crying: Deliver me therefrom, O pure one, and present me to thy Son, rendered fruitful by thy mediation.

The deadly dart of desire hath pierced my heart, and I am wounded by ignorance and suffer incurable pain. O Mother of God, disdain me not, wretch though I am, but grant me healing, in that thou gavest birth to the Lord and Savior Who alone is compassionate.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

My thoughts are impure, my lips deceitful, and all mine acts defiled. What then shall I do? How shall I meet the Judge? O Virgin Mistress, entreat thy Son, Creator and Lord, that He receive my spirit in repentance, in that He alone is compassionate.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock nailed to the Tree of His own will, cried out, lamenting pitiably: “Woe is me, O my Child most beloved! How hath the thankless assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, desiring to leave me childless, O most Beloved One?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, speaking aright the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood. O hieromartyr Dorotheus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thee as the gift of God, O most blessed father”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

By thy perfect life and honorable martyrdom thou didst bring thyself to God as a most precious gift, O most blessed Dorotheus.

Pressing thy thoughts like ripe grapes, O father, thou hast presented thy teachings to the faithful like a cup of gladness.

With the torrents of thine all-wise tongue thou hast stopped the streams of falsehood, O Dorotheus, and hast watered the minds of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* Rain down upon me drops of compunction, O Virgin, washing away the defilement which clingeth to me, that I may glorify thee.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou didst dispel all the night of vanity with the brilliance of thine all-wise preaching, O holy hierarch and father.

With miracles and sacred teachings didst thou make steadfast the thoughts of all the faithful, O wise one, as a sacred pastor.

With the oil of the priesthood the Lord anointed thee, O father, ordaining thee a chief-shepherd of His divine Church.

*Theotokion:* Illumine my whole heart with divine light, O portal of the Light, driving away the darkness of sin.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Ever resplendent with divine dogmas, in thy sufferings thou didst offer thyself to the immortal King as a holy gift, O Dorotheus; and now in gladness thou ever dwellest in the city on high. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Without being separated from the divine Essence, God received flesh in thy womb; yet though He became man, the one Lord remained God, preserving thee, the most immaculate Mother, as a virgin after giving birth, as thou wast before birthgiving. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The undefiled ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou dost suffer willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

The winter of ungodliness which had arisen didst thou revile, O venerable one, and with the warmth of the divine Spirit thou didst preserve thy heart unharmed.

The mountains of the demons’ violence were reduced to dust before thy face, O blessed Dorotheus, and the arrogance of ungodly men withered away.

Though persecuted and driven from city to city, thou didst endure; wherefore, thou hast received the blessed glory and splendor of the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Save me from the tempest of temptations and soul-destroying passions, that with faith I may call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin Maiden and Mother.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Looking forward noetically to divine rewards, O Dorotheus, thou didst endure great tribulations and trials.

Preaching the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead, O Dorotheus, thou didst destroy the vainglorious arrogance of the madness of polytheism.

Refusing to worship the works of the hands of the iniquitous, O martyr Dorotheus, thou didst endure trials, tribulations, wounds and pangs.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the orient of the Sun Who shone forth before the morning star, O pure one, and through thee have those who were in the darkness of evils beheld the Light.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Through the inspiration of the Spirit, O Dorotheus, thou didst acquire a burning heart which destroyeth the onslaught of the adverse spirits.

With sacred writings thou didst set forth the lives of the saints, O divinely inspired father, enlightening thy soul with divine understanding.

The sound of thy words and the power of thy beautiful teachings have passed round about the whole world with divine grace, O all-blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, entreat God, Whom thou didst bear as a man, that He deliver me from fire and torment.

Kontakion, in Tone V —

Resplendent with virtues brighter than the sun and with thy sufferings, O blessed Dorotheus, thou didst shine forth and illumine the land, dispelling the darkness of polytheism and vile heresy. Wherefore, we celebrate thy memory with splendor.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou wast shown to be a star of great brilliance, O Dorotheus, illumining with the radiance of thy sufferings the souls of those who cry out with faith: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Treading the straight paths, thou didst fell the groves of the deceiver, guiding to the paths of life those who cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

With the showers of thy blood thou didst extinguish the furnace of deception, O most glorious one; and thou hast made thine abode by the waters of life, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Deliver my wretched soul from the bonds of sin, O Theotokos, and bind it perfectly to the love of God, that with faith I may glorify thee forever, O Theotokos.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Trampling down the fire and flame in the furnace, the divinely eloquent youths did chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Having humbled thyself in the Lord, O father, thou didst bring low the serpent who boasted in malice; and thou didst cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

When thou wast at an advanced old age, the Creator caused thee to dwell in places of rest not subject to age, O sacred father, thou adornment of martyrs.

Possessed of an angelic life, thou standest now with the angels before the throne of thy Master, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the all-comely Word, thou wast shown to be a comely Virgin. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving, O Ever-virgin, which was revealed to the law-giver on the mountain in the fire and the bush, for the salvation of us, the faithful, do we magnify with unceasing hymnody.

Thou didst guide the flock of Christ to the divine havens, having preserved them unharmed by the storm of the adversary, in that thou art a most excellent hierarch and a fulfiller of the commandments of God, O wise father.

As a pure celebrant of the sacred mysteries, a valiant martyr, a wondrous worker of miracles, a recorder of divine things, an unshakable pillar of the Faith, O father, thou hast received everlasting glory.

Having endured many trials and pangs in the tribunal, thou didst pass over, rejoicing, to the divine life which is devoid of pain, where thou dost now partake of divinity in a pure manner, O right wondrous martyr Dorotheus.

Thy divinely radiant memory hath enlightened the world, illumining the faithful with rays of divine gifts. O father, show forth us who glorify it to be partakers also of thy divine radiance.

*Theotokion:* Bearing in thine arms Christ Who beareth all things in His divine hand, O pure one, do thou ever entreat Him, that He set forth the offerings of our hands as incense before His face.

