The 6th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of our Venerable Father Bessarion the Wonderworker & the Venerable Hilarion the New of the Monastery of Saint Dalmatus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable Bessarion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder…”—

Thou wast the light of monastics, O wise Bessarion, and by the rays of thy virtues and the effulgence of grace thou wast like a most radiant lamp unto the desert. From the gloom of the passions and the darkness of the wicked, from all sorrow and temptation, deliver those who fervently honor thee and hymn with faith thy divine repose.

Enduring to stand amid thorns in thy divine love of ineffable struggles, thou didst show forth an effort equal to that of the martyrs. Thou dost sweeten the bitter waters of the sea and givest drink to souls in thirst, O all-wise one; and thou didst traverse the rushing torrents of the Nile, traversing its waters dryshod, O all-lauded one.

Knowing thee to be like unto the wise Elijah, we all manifestly praise thee, O Bessarion, for thou didst cause torrents of water to fall as rain from the sky by God’s favor unto thee, and by thine honored supplications thou bestowest fountains of rain and divine dew from on high upon all the faithful, as well as grace and power and invincible protection.

And 3 stichera for the venerable Hilarion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given as sign…”—

In attaining a life undefiled, patience, meekness and love unfeigned, boundless abstinence, standing all night, divine compunction, faith, true hope and mercy, thou didst live on earth like an angel in the body, O blessed father Hilarion, intercessor for our souls.

Thou wast an earthly angel and a heavenly man, O venerable one, a well-spring of compunction, a torrent of mercy, an abyss of miracles, a surety for sinners, a truly fruitful olive-tree of God, anointing with the oil of thy works the faces of those who praise thee with faith, O wondrous Hilarion.

Thy mind shining with divine understanding, thou didst transcend the passions of the flesh, unconfused by things below, bearing the lineaments and depicting the beauty of God within thyself, and known as wholly luminous through the activity of the Spirit, O Hilarion our father, thou adornment of monastics.

Glory…, Now & ever…: from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion, in the same melody—

Rejoice, beam of sunlike radiance, throne of the never-setting Sun, who hast shone forth the veritable Sun! Rejoice, mind shedding light upon all by divine effulgence, flash of lightning illumining the ends of the earth, true luster of gold, O all-good and most immaculate one, who hast shone upon the faithful the never-waning Light!

Or this stravrotheotokion —

Beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, His side pierced by a spear, the all-pure one cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the ungrateful people rewarded Thee for the good Thou hast done them? And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their supplications govern our life in peace.

AT MATINS

Ode I

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

The Church chanteth unto God, joining chorus today in thy memory, O divinely inspired father Bessarion, and with faith it glorifieth thy great struggles.

Shown to be a slave of God, thou didst enslave the passions of the body by the powers of thy soul, and didst show thyself to be free of all evil, O most wondrous father.

Adorned with the beauties of thy struggles, thou wast shown to be a right useful vessel of the divine Spirit, containing His activity, O blessed Bessarion.

*Theotokion:* The deceiver of souls hath dragged me down into the pit of destruction; but extend unto me thy mighty hand, O Theotokos, and quickly bring me up into the light.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Having fled to the immaterial and noetic Light out of the darkness of material things, O venerable Hilarion, illumine me by thy supplications unto God.

Having imbibed virtue from thine infancy, thou didst attain unto manhood by the pangs of abstinence and the sweat of fasting, and didst reach the spiritual measure of the stature of Christ.

Having traversed the abyss of the passions and escaped the threefold waves of the demons, thou didst make haste to the dry haven of dispassion, O venerable father.

*Theotokion:* As thou art more exalted than all creation, O only Mother of God, in the latter times, without knowing man, thou gavest birth without father to the Word, Who was begotten of the Father without mother.

Ode III

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Thou didst mount to the heights of dispassion, didst enter into the darkness of the vision of God, and didst receive the divine law within thy heart; and, strengthened thereby, thou becamest an all-radiant beacon for monastics, O venerable one.

Thou wast shown to be a fruitful olive-tree manifestly planted in the house of God, O father, and with the oil of thy struggles thou hast anointed the faces of us who praise thy miracles, O venerable Bessarion.

Having lived a life of non-acquisition, like that of the birds, O blessed one, soaring on wings of dispassion thou didst attain unto the mansions of heaven, rejoicing; wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* Having lived my life in slothfulness and defiled my heart with passions, I approach thee with compunction of soul, O Mistress, and entreat thee to have compassion and save me, making me steadfast through models of repentance.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

With the burning coal of abstinence thou didst utterly consume the thorns of the passions, O venerable one, and dost cool the thoughts of the faithful.

Having acquired through the Spirit the sharp arrows of virtue, as one mighty thou didst wound the heart of the cruel adversary.

Armed with the sword of abstinence, and with prayer as thy breastplate, O venerable one, thou didst vanquish legions of the invisible foe.

*Theotokion:* On the day of judgment be merciful unto me, I pray thee, O Mistress, in thy boldness before Him Who was born of thee.

Kontakion of the venerable Hilarion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

Like a shepherd didst thou preserve within thy fold the flock of thy life-bearing pasture, and wast shown to be great by the loftiness of thy works, O Hilarion the New, having undergone much suffering and sorrow in thy piety. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the most joyful life in heavenly Sion. Pray for us, O venerable one!

Sessional hymn of the venerable Bessarion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Consuming the passions with the fire of abstinence, thou wast shown to be a radiant lamp of dispassion, dispelling the darkness of our souls by grace. Wherefore, with gladness of heart we celebrate thy splendid memorial today, O Bessarion our father.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable Hilarion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

To God didst thou dedicate thy life, O most blessed priest of Christ, as truly a most excellent performer of the sacred mysteries. Wherefore, after much toil and pain, thou didst pass over to the immaterial habitations, rejoicing. And now thou pourest forth upon us streams of healings.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion—

O most immaculate virgin who gavest birth to the transcendent God: With the incorporeal ones unceasingly entreat Him, that before the end He grant remission of transgressions and correction of life unto us who hymn thee with faith and love as is meet, O thou who alone art all-hymned.

Stavrotheotokion—

O all-immaculate Virgin, Mother of Christ God, a sword pierced thine all-holy soul, when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His own will. Cease not to entreat Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

Drops of healing didst thou receive from the depths of grace, wherewith thou didst, at thy supplication, transform the water of the sea into sweetness, O wise and right wondrous one, healing the thirst of thy disciple.

Never didst thou tire in thy life, even unto old age, O divinely wise father, wandering in the desert places and the mountains, by thy will seeking God, Who illumined thee with splendors surpassing noetic miracles.

Thou wast lowly and small, yet exalted by dispassion; wherefore, thou didst put down the uprisings of the demons, as a beacon for monastics who piously praise thee with faith, O father.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the passions of my soul which arise within me, wretch that I am; illumine my mind, O pure one, driving far away the darkness of the demons which afflict me and ever set their snares for me.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Planted by the waters of abstinence, O blessed father, thou wast shown to be a flourishing vine yielding the grapes of piety.

Being wholly godly and spiritual, thou didst depart wholly unto God, O most blessed Hilarion; wherefore, thou dost ever join chorus with the angels.

Thou didst set the feet of thy heart upon the rock of faith, and didst remain unshaken, undaunted by the assaults of the demons.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O all-pure one, who art more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim; for thou didst bear on thine arm our God before Whom they tremble.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

The effulgence of the Comforter which abode within thy soul, O all-blessed one, showed forth the path which leadeth to the kingdom; and treading it, thou didst elude the snares of the demons and spiritual darkness.

Revealed as a new Joshua, O blessed God-bearer, adorned with divine words, enlightened with the splendor of miracles and made comely by the many wonders of God, thou didst halt the passage of the sun by thy luminous entreaty.

Thou wast recorded in the book of life as is meet, having fulfilled all that is written in the divine books. Wherefore, I cry out to thee: By thine entreaties unto the all-seeing God rend asunder the record of mine evil deeds, O father.

*Theotokion:* Following the steps of Him Who shone forth from thy womb in an ineffable birthgiving, O Virgin Mother, the assembly of the venerable joined the choirs of heaven. Pray thou with them, and beg cleansing for us who honor thee.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

The unsleeping eye of thy heart didst thou fix unwaveringly upon the divine commandments, O glorious one.

O God-bearer, by thine activity and through abstinence thou didst ascend the mount of the virtues to the vision of God.

In pouring forth oil for the poor, O venerable Hilarion, thou didst draw forth heavenly richness from thy heart.

*Theotokion:* The Lord of the law showed thee to be the ark of the Word, O Theotokos, wherein He ineffably made His abode.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* From the belly of the sea monster, Jonah cried out: Lead me up from the abyss of hell, I pray, that with a spirit of truth and in a voice of praise I may sacrifice to Thee, as to my Deliverer!

Thou didst not fail when thou didst undertake thy many struggles, O venerable one; for thou didst remain standing for forty days and nights, unmoved by the demands of nature.

Having mortified thy members which are on earth, O wondrous one, thou wast enriched with the vital activity of healing, and thou livest in the heavens, ever healing the passions of our dying souls.

Ever lamenting thy life, thou didst repose; for divine desire kindled a fire within thee, O father. And now thou hast found consolation in the heavens, joining the choirs of the venerable.

*Theotokion:* The Lord is born of thee in the flesh, making thee the Mistress of all creatures. O pure one, entreat Him to deliver our souls from the enemy who hath dominion over them.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

With faith thou didst slay with dust the noetic Goliath, who rose up in malice against thine unarmed conflict; and, uprooting his trophies of victory, thou didst fell him who boasted exceedingly.

Thou didst emulate Hilarion in the virtues and, spiritually following in his steps, in asceticism wast shown to be supreme and a model for thy flock, O venerable one.

With the sweat of abstinence thou didst utterly quench the burning darts of the enemy, and having kindled the fire of faith, thou didst consume the insolence of the heretics’ unbelief.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst truly conceive God the Word in thy womb, and gavest birth unto Him supernaturally, O most immaculate one. By thy supplications entreat Him in behalf of those who hymn thee as the true Theotokos.

Kontakion of the venerable Bessarion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: The steadfast…”—

Emulating the powers on high, by example thou didst live the life of the birds, O venerable one; and putting transitory things from thy mind, led to the heavenly beauties of Christ the King by thy constant desire, thou didst come even unto Him. O Bessarion, entreat Him unceasingly in behalf of us all!

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* The all-wise children did not worship the golden body, but entered into the flame themselves and mocked the gods of the heathen. They cried aloud in the midst of the flame, and the Angel bedewed them, saying: The prayer of your mouths hath already been heard.

Having cultivated thy soul with the pious plough of abstinence, O father, thou didst grow a most fruitful grain; and stored up in the granaries of heaven, thou dost nourish therewith those who chant with faith: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having been united to the immaterial Light, thou becamest a pure light; and thou didst traverse the rushing torrent of the river without thy feet becoming wet. Thou didst tread the straight paths, O divinely wise Bessarion, having dried up the turgid waters of sin.

What an awesome wonder it is that, by the invocation of God, thou didst render potable waters which before could not be drunk, didst traverse the rushing torrent of the river, and didst stay the passage of the sun, O divinely wise Bessarion, who art magnified by sacred and divine signs!

*Theotokion:* Of thee, O pure one, was born the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, Who destroyed the evil philosophers and gave to the multitude of monastics and the venerable the wisdom to chant with grace: Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

On the pasturage of the kingdom on high thou didst nurture thy flock, O father; and, driving away the wild beasts of heresy with the staff of thy teachings, thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Emitting the radiance of miracles, thou dost dispel the gloom of infirmities and dost shine forth beams of health and healing today upon those who cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst enter in to the wedding feast of Christ the King in the highest, clad in vesture befitting an invited guest. Wherefore, having reclined, thou hast cried out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature and speech thou didst give birth unto the Master of all, and thou hast nourished at thy breast Him Who will prepare a table for all in time to come. Him do thou earnestly beseech in our behalf, O all-pure one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The light manifestly shone upon thee as a righteous man; joy and gladness were given thee, O father, as to one who wept earnestly on earth and wast a stranger to it in thy lack of acquisition and thine endurance of all manner of evils.

Without attaining thine ultimate desire, O venerable father, thou didst pass through many cities and desert places until thou didst attain the city on high, splendidly adorned.

With the bright radiance of virtue thou hast shone forth the dawn upon us, ever illumining our thoughts. Wherefore, we celebrate this day in thy light-bearing memory, O father Bessarion.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, thou hast given birth unto a new Son, equally without beginning with the unoriginate Father, and thou alone hast renewed our nature which hath grown old through grievous transgression. Wherefore, together we hymn thee, O Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With streams of thy tears thou didst drown the uprisings of the passions and constant evil thoughts, and wast an abyss of longsuffering, O venerable one, leading to the tranquility of quietude those who cry: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Possessing thine admonitions for abstinence like a hard diamond, O venerable Hilarion, we make firm our hearts and vanquish legions of the passions, crying out in faith with our tongue: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Having caused the passionate nature of the flesh to wither up through abstinence and temperance, O venerable one, thou didst fill thyself with the spiritual activity of the Spirit and didst attain unto the paths of dispassion, O all-wise one, crying out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Beneath the shelter of thy holy wings, O Mistress, do we all flee who are beset by cruel afflictions, temptations and tribulations. For, having thee as our intercessor, we cry out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Venerable Bessarion

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Girded about with might, thou didst cast down the might of the deceiver, and wast shown to be powerful against the passions, O all-blessed one; wherefore, receiving the grace of miracles from God, thou healest the incurable ailments of the faithful.

The greatness of thy glory hath, through God, been manifest unto all creation, illumining the faithful with the sacred scenes of thy blameless life, O divinely wise Bessarion, who art truly the adornment of monks and paragon of the fathers.

Groaning, lamenting and grieving, thou didst ever sprinkle the ground with tears of compunction, O divinely wise father, until thou didst acquire divine consolation, making thine abode in the city of God with all the saints.

Thou didst flourish like a lily in the fragrance of the virtues, perfuming our souls, O father. Wherefore, we keep thy memory, O Bessarion, praying that, for thy sake, we may be delivered from the stench of offenses and from all demonic affliction.

*Theotokion:* Sinning mindlessly, I remain uncorrected, having become foolish in my great senselessness. Wherefore, I cry out to thee, O Mistress: Visit me now, who find myself in such need, and cure the passions of my lowly heart.

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Christ hath truly shown thee to be a well-spring of miracles, O blessed one, washing away the painful defilements of the passions and easily drowning the pangs of infirmity. Wherefore, we all call thee a river of spiritual cleansing, O all-blessed one.

Spiritually flourishing like a palm-tree in the house of God, O all-glorious one, thou didst produce the fruit of abstinence like sweetness, whereby thou hast delighted thy noetical flock, O all-wise one. Wherefore, thou hast received heavenly crowns of glory, O ever-memorable father.

Thou wast shown to be a rule of abstinence, O father Hilarion, a model of meekness and a serene instructor for all. By thine entreaties to the Lord still thou also the tempest of my passions, and grant profound peace unto me who ask, that I may call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* Thee do we have as a weapon amid tribulations and dangers, a haven and rampart amid sorrows, a noetical shield amid battles, and a great mercy-seat amid grievous offenses and temptations. Wherefore, we honor thee, the Theotokos, as is meet, and magnify thy birthgiving.

