Also on The 7th Day of the Month of June

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs

Cyriaca, Valeria & Maria

AT VESPERS:

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone VIII —

Wed to the preëternal Word, and having utterly forsaken the folly of idolatry, in the silence of your mouth did ye abide, that ye might hear the word of God in your hearts; and like reason-endowed ewe-lambs were ye sacrificed unto God in your innocence. Wherefore, we cry out to you: Rejoice, ye partakers of the ineffable glory of paradise!

Like the wise virgins did ye go forth to meet Christ, the Bridegroom Who cometh at midnight, O martyrs; and having woven wedding garments for yourselves from the blood of your suffering, as a dowry to Him did ye offer your lives. Wherefore, we cry unto you: Rejoice, ye who have been crowned in the mansions of heaven!

O martyr Valeria, as thy name signifieth strength, stronger than adamant didst thou remain in the endurance of martyrdom. Wounding the proud prince of darkness with the power of the Cross, and entering the heavenly mansions with honor, thou dost look down from the heavens upon those who struggle for the faith, granting them strength. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, thou mighty champion of the faithful!

Glory..., in Tone VI —

The most pure and precious mouth of Christ hath said: Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; fear not those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Laying up these words of the Lord in your hearts, O all-praised martyrs Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria, ye bent your necks beneath the sword in expectation of a crown from God and of life eternal. Wherefore, your hope did not put you to shame; and now, delighting in the mansions of paradise, forget us not who with love hymn your sufferings, that by your bold mediation and fervent supplications we may find great mercy with Christ.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

Of old, when the unblemished Ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried aloud: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that the ungrateful assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate, and condemneth Thee, the Life of all, to death? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word.”

At the Aposticha: stichera from the Octoechos; Glory... of the martyrs, in Tone III —

Come, ye who love the martyrs, let us hymn those who are crowned with the diadem of suffering! Come, ye lovers of silence, let us glorify those who set a watch before their mouths! Come, ye virgins, with gladness let us praise those who preserved their virginity undefiled! Come, all ye faithful, let us honor the holy memory of those who endured suffering, crying out to them with heartfelt love: Rejoice, O Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria, ye brides of Christ!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross…” —

A sword pierced thy heart, O all-pure one, when thou didst behold thy Son upon the Cross; and thou didst cry out: “Show me not to be childless, O my Son and God, Who didst keep me a virgin even after I gave birth!”

Troparion, in Tone I —

O reason-endowed ewe-lambs of the Lamb and Shepherd, who finished the race and kept the Faith, by martyrdom ye were brought before Christ; wherefore, with joyous soul we keep your holy memory today, magnifying Christ, O right marvellous ones.

AT MATINS:

The canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the three glorious vessels of the triune God,” the composition of Valeria, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

O Trinity, Thou unoriginate Unity, grant me a pure mouth, sending down Spirit-bearing grace upon me, that I may hymn Thy three sanctified vessels.

O ye three brilliant rays of the noetic Sun, shining forth in the struggles of your martyrdom ye illumine the whole world, glorifying the triune God.

Now is the ancient prophecy of Joel fulfilled, for, lo! the Spirit hath been abundantly poured out upon the servants and handmaids of God, showing forth the weak as mighty and virgins as stronger than men and unvanquished by torments.

*Theotokion:* Him Whom the prophets foretold and the apostles and martyrs confessed didst thou show forth to the world, O Theotokos. Wherefore, do thou beseech Him that thy Christian flock be saved.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Purified vessels of virginity, adorned with the purple robe of torments, standing firmly upon the rock of the confession of Christ, the glorious Cyriaca, together with Valeria and Maria, preach the Trinity.

“We know none other God than Thee; the beauty of the corrupt world we count but dung; wherefore, accept us into Thine eternal mansions!” did ye cry, O blessed athletes.

O virgin martyrs, brides of the incorrupt and preëternal Word, daughters of the unoriginate Father, chosen vessels of the Holy Spirit: Make steadfast our faith.

*Theotokion:* The ewe-lamb who gave birth to the Lamb Who taketh away the sin of the world, doth grant strength unto all who for His sake are led away to the slaughter, conducting them in triumph to the heavenly habitations where the abode is of all who are glad.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VII —

Today the angels rejoice over men, and the assemblies of martyrs hold festival, for, lo! new passion-bearers enter into the heavenly bridal chamber with glory, to be crowned by the hand of God. Today, O ye faithful, having recourse to the temple of the Lord, with one mouth and one heart let us hymn the memory of the suffering of the all-praised and holy virgins Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria, by their supplications asking remission of sins and great mercy from Christ God.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Proclaiming the peace of God, finding in this sinful world no fit place to which to turn, and returning not to Noah’s ark, but to the splendid bridal chamber and the heavenly Father, the pure doves hymn the unoriginate Trinity, the cause of all.

The unoriginate Father did ye glorify; the Son Who is equally without beginning did ye preach; the Spirit, the Comforter, did ye serve, O virgins and passion-bearers, three in number.

“O immortal King, accept our life as a coin of tribute, and our souls offered as a sacred shekel unto Thee, our God and Master,” did ye cry, O passion-bearers, manfully enduring divers torments.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden Theotokos, having ineffably served the mystery of God’s dispensation and given flesh most gloriously to One of the Trinity, thou dost ever abide at His right hand.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Burning in spirit, ye sealed your lips, O blessed ones, gathering your treasure within your hearts, whence ye drew up strength during torture.

“If our outer man perish amid torments, yet our inner man is renewed,” ye cried, O virgin martyrs, awaiting liberation from this mortal body.

Bearing the image of the thrice-radiant God and illumining your souls with the brightness whereof, like three spiritual stars in the firmament of heaven ye shone forth, O thrice-blessed passion-bearers.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou light and abode of the Light! Rejoice, O Mother of Life! Rejoice, thou glory of all the saints, O all-immaculate Theotokos!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

“Whosoever shall confess me on earth, them will I confess also before My heavenly Father,” didst thou say, O Jesus, to Thy witnesses.

“O Savior, Who hast granted us to suffer with Thee, receive us now in Thy Kingdom, as Thou didst the wise thief,” did ye cry as ye were led to your death, O pure virgins.

Divested of all things corruptible and vain, ye inherited eternal riches, O glorious Cyriaca, ­divinely-wise Maria and Valeria.

*Theotokion:* Disdain not the humble entreaties of thy servants, for from the abyss of temptation do we cry unto thee: Haste thou to help us, O Theotokos!

Kontakion, in Tone II —

Cleaving to the faith of Christ and loving the unfeigned promises of God, looking for eternal life and the blessedness of paradise, ye steadfastly endured torture and fervently bowed your necks beneath the sword; wherefore, ye have been crowned by the hand of the Lord, O Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria, and your memory is glorious. O passion-bearers, entreat ye Christ God, the Judge of the contest, for those who faithfully honor your struggles.

*Ikos:* Come, ye faithful, and bearing flowers let us make haste to the temple of the Lord; and with hymns of divine beauty let us laud the memory of the martyrs, the holy virgins Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria; for flourishing like lilies amongst the thorns of paganism and adorned with flowers of the virtues, they received wreaths of suffering not woven by human hands; and now are they led with glory into the heavenly garden. Wherefore, we fervently cry out: Rejoice, ye who chose the good part! Rejoice, ye who by transient suffering purchased eternal bliss! Rejoice, ye who acquired boldness before the Holy Trinity! Pray ye without ceasing, O passion-bearers, for those who faithfully honor your struggles!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Your members did ye surrender to mutilation and your youthful bodies to the slaughter, that ye might gain your souls and inherit life eternal, O all-praised martyrs.

O thrice-blessed virgins, how have ye disdained all the beauteous things of this world; how have ye been bold unto death, singing in the furnace of temptations as did the three youths: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, today ye shall be with Me in paradise,” didst Thou say unto those who were slain for Thee, O Master. Wherefore, with gladness they cried out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* The seraphim magnify thee, the cherubim minister unto thee in fear, all of the angelic armies do unceasingly marvel and, calling upon thee for thine aid, assemblies of men cry out: Blessed art thou by all generations, O most holy Virgin ­Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O children, equal in number to the Trinity, bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word, Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who imparteth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

Aflame with the fire of divine love, enduring bodily torment as though they had no bodies, the three maidens joyously cried out to the Trinity, exclaiming: “Let us bless the Father Who is without cause, and the Son Who is equally without beginning; and let us glorify the Spirit, the Comforter, equally enthroned with Them, hymning and supremely exalting Them unto all ages!”

“O hell, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting? Lo! against you do we make bold, Christ God helping us,” did ye cry out, O blessed martyrs, joining chorus amid your sufferings, chanting a hymn unto the Trinity.

“We can do all things, through Christ, Who strengtheneth us,” did ye cry with the Apostle, O manly-wise virgins. Wherefore, ye endured all torments utterly undaunted, and drained the cup which your heavenly Bridegroom gave you, with one mouth making threefold psalmody, hymning and supremely exalting the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, unto all ages.

*Theotokion:* Prefiguring thee, O Virgin, the unburnt bush was not consumed, and the youths, showing forth the incorruption of thy birthgiving, were not burned by the flame, for truly receiving the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, thou didst remain unconsumed thereby, but like gold, which partaketh of the fire, thou hast shone forth; and all creation, marvelling at the dread mystery, doth supremely exalt thee unto all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Although today we commemorate your martyrdom, yet knowing that even after death ye are alive, we commend ourselves to your intercession, O passion-bearers, magnifying your firm confession.

Lovingly we keep your memory, O martyrs; we kiss your wounds; and we hymn your struggles, magnifying Christ God Who crowned you with glory.

O virgins, three in number, the Trinity Who wrought all things, Whom ye glorified on earth and before Whom ye now do stand, boldly entreat ye in behalf of the world.

*Theotokion:* Thee, whom the heavenly armies unceasingly glorify and on whose account all creation joineth in chorus, the true Theotokos and helper of men, do we ever magnify with love.

Exapostilarion —

Fleeing the night of impiety, ye went forth to greet the radiant dawn of the Sun of righteousness, O all-praised martyrs Cyriaca, Valeria and Maria, with Whose rays ye illumined your minds, bedewing your souls with the dew of tears, rising early in spirit for the Savior of the world, and crying out to Him in compunction: “Seek us out, as Thou didst the lost sheep, O Lamb of God, and unite us to Thy chosen flock, O good Shepherd, that we also, emulating Thy voluntary sacrifice, may offer ourselves as an oblation pleasing unto Thee, and at Thy dread judgment may be delivered from the lot of the goats.”

Theotokion —

In thee do we boast, O Theotokos, and thee do we have as our intercession before God. Stretch forth thy holy hand, and crush our enemies; and from the holy place send down help upon thy servants.

