The 11th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles

Bartholemew & Barnabas

\(for this day we provide also services in commemoration of the Icon “It is Truly Meet”

and the Protomartyrs of China\)

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 5 for the Apostle Bartholemew, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

With the net of thy words, O divinely eloquent apostle, thou didst draw the ends of the world forth from the abyss of vainglory and wicked ungodliness, and didst bring them with faith unto Christ God Who had given thee such grace, in that thou art His divine disciple and the recounter of His mysteries, O apostle Bartholemew. *Twice*

Jesus our God, the Sun of righteousness, caused thee to shine upon the fullness of the world like a ray of light, O all-glorious one, mightily dispelling the gloom of ungodliness and illumining all who sit in the darkness of ignorance, whom thou hast made heirs of the Light, O divinely wise Bartholemew. *Twice*

Submitting to the will of Him Whose will all things obey, and emulating Him as a teacher of righteousness, rejoicing, thou didst drain the cup of death because of His suffering on the Cross, and thou standest before thine ultimate Desire, joining chorus with the angels and the apostles, O glorious ­Bartholemew.

And 3 stichera of the Apostle Barnabas, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Thou hast received invincible authority and power over the demons, O apostle, in the name of Christ, to drive away the princes of darkness; and thou didst travel over the earth, shedding light like the sun, and, being the first to arrive in glorious Rome, thou didst preach the salvific advent of Christ, O glorious one.

Emulating the primal goodness and the essential and all-divine life, thou becamest a man good in essence, O Barnabas, and, receiving a name ­signifying son of consolation, by the goodness of thy character and the purity of thy mind thou didst show thyself to be a true disciple of Christ.

Being an instrument well tuned by the action of the Spirit, O Barnabas, thou didst commit thyself to summon the nations, guiding them to the knowledge of Christ by thy words and deeds, and thou hast enlightened all to confess the true divinity of Jesus, the Savior of our souls.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI —

O all-praised Barnabas, thou radiant vessel of the Holy Spirit and son of consolation, even before Paul thou wast the foremost of the seventy disciples, and with Paul thou didst preach the Gospel to the ends of the earth. Wherefore, fulfilling thy discourse of grace with thy deeds, thou didst offer thyself up as a pure wholeburnt offering to Christ thy Teacher. Beg thou ever, O glorious apostle, that our souls be saved in peace, we pray.

Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or the dogmaticon in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter \[I Pet. 1: 3-9\]

Brethren: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who according to His abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Whom having not seen, ye love; in Whom, though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter \[I Pet. 1: 13-19\]

Beloved: Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance: but as He who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy. And if ye call on the Father, Who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear: forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter \[I Pet. 2: 11-24\]

Beloved: I beseech you as sojourners and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme; or unto governors, as unto those who are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of those who do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king. Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow His steps: Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth: Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself to Him Who judgeth righteously: Who His own self bore our sins in His own body on the Tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Pentecostarion.

But if this day fall within the Apostles’ Fast, we chant these stichera of the apostles, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…” —

Your proclamation of salvation hath gone forth into all the earth, O apostles, seers of God, and hath illumined the souls of the lost and brought unto Christ men enlightened by grace. Wherefore, pray ye, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

O all-radiant beacons of Christ, most precious vessels, all-wise ones, who through faith have come to contain the effulgence of the Spirit, pillars of the Church, all-glorious heavens declaring the glory of God: entreat Him, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

O blessed one, ye brought to Christ God the nations, delivered by the blood of Him Who was well pleased to be born on earth and Who of His own will endured the Cross and death, O glorious ones. Entreat Him now, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

O all-praised Barnabas, apostle of the Savior, receptacle of faith, son of consolation, calm of the tempest-tossed, as thou hast boldness, pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be ­preserved in peace on the day of thy ­commemoration.

Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or the theotokion: “O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh…”

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy apostles, entreat the merciful God, that He grant our souls remission of ­transgressions.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the apostles, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, theotokion: “We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race…”

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

The spiritual choir of the apostles was mystically sent into the world by God Most High, and they were unwittingly shown forth as physicians of the suffering, calling upon the Unity in three Hypostases, and wisely described the divine incarnation of the Lord Emmanuel. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

O Virgin, we hymn thee as the unburnt bush which Moses beheld, the mountain of God, the holy cloud, the undefiled tabernacle, the God-pleasing table, the palace of the King Most High, the most radiant and impassable gate.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…” —

Like stars do ye enlighten the ends of the earth with splendid radiance, the divine doctrines of your holy preaching, O apostles of the Lord, initiates of the mysteries of heaven. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, the fervent aid of those in need, our help and reconciliation with God, for whose sake we have been delivered from corruption.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify you, O holy apostles Bartholemew and Barnabas, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby ye struggled in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Dragging up the nations out of the depths of ignorance in godly manner with the net of the Word, thou didst draw them forth with faith; and as a wellspring of spiritual waters thou hast watered the whole world with grace. Wherefore, saved by thee, O divinely eloquent Bartholemew, we bless thee as the close friend of Christ, crying out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, without seed gavest birth to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who worship thine all-holy birthgiving with faith.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Reading from the Gospel According to St. John §67 \[21:15-25\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me more than these?” He saith unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He saith unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee” He said unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time: “Lovest thou Me?” And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He saith unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, who is he who betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him: “He shall not die”; but, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone I —

Your proclamation of salvation hath gone forth into all the earth, O apostles, seers of God, and hath illumined the souls of the lost and brought unto Christ men enlightened by grace. Wherefore, pray ye, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons for the apostles, with 4 troparia each.

Ode I

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew, ­i­n Tone II —

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

God Who seeth all things beforehand, perceiving thy mind in manner divine, chose thee and enrolled thee in the choir of the apostles, O most lauded Bartholemew, illumining thy heart with grace.

Ascending to the summit of the virtues, O thou who art most rich, as an apostle of Christ thou wast enriched with the cloven tongue of fire breathed forth by the Spirit, and thou dost burn up the tinder of impiety and ignorance.

Thou wast truly shown to be a God-bearing coal afire with the radiance of the divine Spirit, O all-praised Bartholemew, consuming the chaff of falsehood and enlightening the hearts of those who hymn thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, tell us how it is that thou givest suck? How camest thou to be a mother, resplendent with the seals of thy virginity intact? “To the one God and Lord of all, Who transcendeth nature and Who, testing, plumbeth the depths, did I give birth!”

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas, in the same tone —

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

As thou art a good man and hast been shown to be a son of consolation, dispel the affliction of my soul and the soul-destroying grief of sin, that, full of gladness, I may hymn thee.

Surrounded by the pure radiance of Christ the King of all, Who sprang forth from the tribe of Judah and came from the sacred Levitic kinship, O blessed one who art most rich, thou didst preach the supplanting of the law by grace.

Thy splendid life of pristine goodness and natural essence showed thee to be a secondary god, rendered blessed by graces derived therefrom, O all-wise and glorious Barnabas, thou offspring of divine consolation.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress Theotokos, the divine choir of maidens doth divinely hymn thee as the good one among women who hast been adorned with the beauties of divinity; for in manner past recounting thou gavest birth to the Word, our Benefactor.

Katavasia as prescribed by the typicon.

Ode III

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Like rain from heaven, thou hast watered the whole world, which had grown dry under the darkness of ungodliness, O all-wise and right wondrous God-seer.

Thou didst put forth a stream of the drink of salvation, O most honored Bartholemew, and didst bring forth manifold fruit of salvation for the nations, O right wondrous one.

With the salt of grace thou didst put an end to the putrefaction of idolatry, O most wise one, delighting the hearts of those who honor thee with the sweet discourse of faith.

*Theotokion:* We honor thee, the only Virgin Mother, as the mediatress of our salvation who hast delivered the world by thy supplications, O immaculate one.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

O glorious Barnabas, thou wast seen to be a willing cloud bearing rain for us from the wellspring of grace and dropping a torrent of nourishment down upon us.

The authority of the omnipotent Spirit, seeing thee to be a minister of the mysteries of Christ gifted with divers splendors, set thee apart, O all-praised one.

Barnabas and Paul, the divinely wise and right glorious apostles, enlightened by the grace of Thy Cross, through faith brought the nations to Thee, O Master.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be like a lily in thy purity, shining forth amid thorns in the radiance of thy virginity, O most pure Theotokos.

Kontakion of the Apostle Barnabas, in Tone II —

Thou wast a most true servant of the Lord, and, as the foremost of the seventy apostles, didst shine forth in thy preaching with Paul, proclaiming Christ the Savior unto all; wherefore, with songs we hymn thy divine memory, O Barnabas.

*Ikos:* The Son of God, Who is equally eternal with the Spirit, Who in His good pleasure became incarnate on earth as a man, granting dispassion through His honored suffering, ordained thee an apostle, a herald of the Faith wise in discourse and right wondrous, and a true worshiper of the Trinity, O blessed one. Wherefore, the precious and radiant morning-star hath shone forth upon the faithful, illumining thy divine memory, which we celebrate as is meet.

Sessional hymn of the Apostle Bartholemew, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Dragging the nations up out of the depths of ignorance in godly manner with the net of the Word, thou didst haul them in with faith; and as a wellspring of spiritual waters thou hast watered the whole world with grace. Wherefore, saved by thee, O divinely eloquent Bartholemew, we bless thee as the close friend of Christ, crying out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remissions of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…: sessional hymn of the Apostle Barnabas, in the same tone & melody —

Thou wast shown to be endowed with reason, like the heavens declaring the glory of God, dispelling the night of ignorance with the effulgence of miracles, with rays of power and grace, and illumining the ends of the earth with beams of divine knowledge. Wherefore, today we, the faithful, glorify thy splendid and holy memory, and we cry out to thee: O most lauded Barnabas, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, without seed gavest birth to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who worship thine all-holy birthgiving with faith.

Ode IV

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Protected by the Cross of the Lord, O most excellent Bartholemew, thou didst set at naught the savagery of the demons, and by thy preaching didst dispel their soul-destroying deception.

Christ showed thee forth as a light to the world, a divine effulgence of glory, O God-pleasing Bartholemew; for thou hast enlightened all creation with divine knowledge, O most blessed one.

Like a most excellent steed, the chariot of the Word, thou didst roil the pagan seas; and with faith thou didst consume the uttermost parts of bitter ungodliness.

*Theotokion:* Healing the ancient transgression of Eve, O all-pure one, the All-divine One made His abode within thee and hath restored me, a fallen man.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

Following the commandments of the Master, O all-praised apostle Barnabas, thou didst distribute all thy property among the poor, becoming an eloquent preacher of Christ.

Thou didst attain unto the uttermost splendor of the virtues, and, finding Paul to be a divinely eloquent apostle, with him thou didst proclaim to all the unfathomable abyss of the mysteries of God.

Passing over the ends of the world like the sun in thy radiant effulgence, O most honored Barnabas, following Paul thou didst illumine all with thy discourse of grace.

Having shared in the sufferings of the Savior, O all-praised Barnabas, thou art glorified with Him in the mansions of heaven in manner past understanding, delighting in gladness.

*Theotokion:* By thee hath the curse of Eve our first mother been abolished, O most immaculate one; for thou gavest birth to the eternal Word incarnate, Who hath crowned the world with blessings.

Ode V

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* Thou art a Mediator between God and man, O Christ God; for by Thee, O Master, are we led up out of the night of ignorance to Thy Father, the Source of light.

To Christ, the uncreated Light Who appeared unto us among created things, didst thou first converse, coming to Him, O apostle; and thou wast enlightened by Him with divine rays.

Thou didst live in the world like a divine dew, granting healing to men, O all-blessed Bartholemew, and with prophecy didst lay waste to the land of ungodliness.

Approaching the primal Light, thou wast a secondary luminary, illumined with the radiance and effulgence emitted by Him, in that thou thyself didst see the Word, O most wise Bartholemew.

*Theotokion:* Mindful of thy words, we now call thee blessed; for through thee, O immaculate one, have we found blessedness, and have been enriched with a truly honorable life.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

Having passed through the shadow of the law shining with grace, thou didst illumine the ­fullness of the nations, publishing glad tidings by preaching Christ.

Manifestly arrayed in the mighty dominion of the Holy Spirit, O apostle, thou didst cast down the evil spirits, delivering the world from their malice.

Thou wast the voice of one crying among the barren nations, O wise Barnabas who art most rich, proclaiming to all the unapproachable mystery of the divine incarnation.

*Theotokion:* Behold, as Isaiah foretold, O all-pure Theotokos, in manner past recounting thou didst contain Christ God within thy womb, and gavest birth to Him supernaturally, O Theotokos.

Ode VI

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Having received the grace to work miracles and been enriched with the ability to accomplish healings, O most wise Bartholemew, thou didst tend the flock of the nations.

Thy fiery tongue hath burned up all falsehood like chaff, O all-glorious one, and hath illumined the hearts of the faithful with divine preaching.

Having thy Teacher, the Word Who is without beginning, as a wellspring of wisdom, O all-glorious preacher of God, with grace thou didst show the wisdom of the world to be foolish.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth in manner transcending nature, O Virgin, and remainest eternally virgin, revealing the true divinity, thy Son and God, in images.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

Shining forth upon the world resplendent with rays of light, O Christ God, Thou Sun of righteousness, Thou didst illumine Barnabas and Paul.

Thou wast a scythe which severed weeds at the root, cutting down inveterate falsehood with thy miracles, in manner past describing, O wondrous and divinely eloquent Barnabas.

Thou wast shown to be a law-giver of grace, applying the images of the Old Testament to the true divine manifestation, O God-pleasing Barnabas.

*Theotokion:* He Who stretched out the heavens by His will hath shown thee to be another, earthly, heaven, O all-pure Mother of God, and appeared, shining forth from thee.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…” —

Thou hast been shown to be a great sun for the whole world, shining with the radiance of doctrines and awesome miracles, and illumining those who honor thee, O Bartholemew, apostle of the Lord.

*Ikos:* Thou wast seen to be like heaven, declaring the glory of God through the Holy Spirit, O apostle whose eyes beheld God, and wast shown to be like a radiant sun for the world, dispelling the gloom of deception by divine grace. Wherefore, I pray to thee and offer entreaty: With thy divine rays enlighten the blind eyes of my soul, O thou who art most rich, and grant me discourse, that I may open my mouth and sing on the day of thy commemoration, whereon all the faithful praise thee in gladness, O Bartholemew, apostle of the Lord.

Ode VII

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Thou didst reveal to the world the great mystery of the divine incarnation, which is infinite and beyond all understanding, O Bartholemew, and which, though ineffable, is accessible and credible to the faithful alone.

Rolling like a stone, O all-holy Bartholemew, in pure manner thou didst mightily overturn the foundation of falsehood; and, shown to be an insuperable foundation for the Church, thou dost preserve it unshaken.

Thou didst portray the divine likeness using the virtues as paints, O all-blessed Bartholemew; ­wherefore, as a divine apostle, thou didst preach the greatly hymned advent of Christ to all.

*Theotokion:* Without being subject to cultivation, O pure one, thou gavest rise to the ripe Cluster of grapes; and, seeing Him suspended upon the Tree, thou didst cry out: “O my sweet Child, pour forth the sweet new wine whereby the drunkenness of the passions is dispelled!”

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

In holiness, O Barnabas, didst thou preach the Son Who resteth in the saints, Who is equally without beginning and enthroned with the Father, and Who, having become man, wrought salvation for us.

The preachers of Christ, the most honored Barnabas and the God-pleasing Paul, shining forth divine radiance in beams, issued forth like light, illumining the full inheritance of the nations with their discourse of grace.

He who nurtured thee, O divinely blessed Barnabas, who caused the word of grace to blossom forth, rejoiceth today, having put thee forth as a shoot for Christ. And having become his scion, by thy supplications deliver us from our present captivity.

*Theotokion:* Directing my life, O most pure one, guide it to thy right tranquil haven, having given birth to God, the Source of good things, Who granteth abundant goodness to all the faithful.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Most wisely didst thou teach the Gospel of the Savior to great and small, to the many and the few, O divinely wise Bartholemew, and through thy discourses thou didst work great and all-glorious signs for all.

Issuing forth from Sion like a river, O thou who art most rich, thou dost water the assemblies of the Church, and hast most manifestly caused a stream of spiritual food to flow, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

As an apostle thou hast manifestly been divinely adorned with the most splendid and great gifts of God. O blessed one, in grace thy rank doth transcend all glory in the sight of men.

*Theotokion:* The dispassionate Mind alone abode within thy womb, beyond the understanding of men, O most pure one. He Who transcendeth all time came under time by taking upon Himself the coarseness of the flesh. Wherefore, with faith and love we glorify thee, O ­Theotokos.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

As our Benefactor, O Bestower of life, thou didst summon thy steeds, the glorious Barnabas and the wondrous Paul, to bestir the sea of the nations, driving out the falsehood of polytheism by the doctrines of piety.

As God, O all-accomplishing Spirit and Comforter, thou didst set within Thy Church shining beacons, proclaiming Thy power, and crying out the to Son and the Father: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Radiantly, like the sun in the world, didst thou shine forth, O God-pleaser, manifestly conversing with the noetic Sun; for, set afire by His effulgence, thou becamest a secondary luminary, revealing to all the power of His mystery.

Having illumined the whole earth with thy teachings, as is meet thou didst obtain blessedness past understanding, receiving from the Master a crown of splendor in the mansions of heaven, O most honorable Barnabas.

*Theotokion:* That Thou mightest abolish the primal curse and condemnation to death of our first mother, O Word of God, Thou wast born of the Virgin Mother of God and hast granted all imperishable immortality.

Ode IX

Canon of the Apostle Bartholemew

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

As a servant of the Word who beheld Him with thine own eyes, as His disciple and godly preacher, thou hast now truly been counted worthy to live where the Word doth dwell, as the All-good One Himself promised in truth.

Standing now before the throne of thy Master, illumined by the rays emitted thereby, O divinely wise Bartholemew, looking down, thou dost deliver those who hymn thee from sufferings and divers evil circumstances.

Vouchsafed to become a son of God because of thy faith, thou wast an heir to the treasures of the Father. O His hands which bestow such great gifts! O the generosity of our supremely exalted Christ, Who hath glorified thee, O most blessed God-seer!

*Theotokion:* All the prophets, perceiving thee from afar with clairvoyant eyes, proclaimed thee to be the one who would become the Mother of the Creator and Master of all. Wherefore, we declare thee the most hymned Theotokos.

Canon of the Apostle Barnabas

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*.

O apostles who, having become light through virtue, stand now before the great Light, beseech the Master to grant peace to the world and to save our Church, which ye have formed.

Thou didst manifestly consume the rhetors’ malice with the flame of thy wisdom, O divinely revealed Barnabas, in that thou hast within thee a wellspring of divine radiance. Wherefore, we honor thy most sacred feast.

Celebrating thy memory now with faith, O apostle, we set thee before the Master as our intercessor, O most honored Barnabas, sacred preacher of God, praying that, through thy mediation, we may obtain remission of our offenses.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast found to be like the dawn of the morning, shining forth with rays of virginity within the night of life and revealing to us the East, the noetic Sun of righteousness, O most pure Mother of God.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…” —

Come, ye people, let us hymn the apostles of Christ, the godly Bartholemew and the wise Barnabas, the preachers of the Faith, for they pray to Christ in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

O pure and holy Mistress who alone knewest not man: in that thou art our salvation and hope, entreat our Deliverer Who was born of thee, that He save the world from falsehood, tribulations and sorrows.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel. : “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Jesus our God, the Sun of righteousness, sent thee forth as a ray of great brilliance unto all the fullness of the world, O divinely wise apostle, dispelling the gloom of malice and enlightening hearts made dark by ignorance and the assaults of the passions, O Bartholemew who art most rich. *Twice*

Thou wast a pure vessel of the Trinity, lustrous with the splendors of the virtues, O Barnabas; and, receiving in thy heart the radiance thereof and the most splendid light of the Sun, thou didst radiantly reflect it upon the ends of the earth, illumining those who sit in the darkness of ignorance, O God-pleaser.

Like clouds, O blessed ones, ye let drop the rain of heaven upon the ends of the earth and water the souls of the faithful with grace divine, drowning the tares of grievous ungodliness and rendering fruitful the souls of men. Wherefore, we honor you in praise, O apostles of the Lord.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone V —

As the Wisdom of God, the eternal Word of the Father, foretold in the Gospels: ye are fruitful vines, O all-praised apostles, bearing ripe and beautiful grapes in your orations. And, eating of them, we, the faithful, delight in gladness for the taste thereof, O God-pleasing Bartholemew, and Barnabas, thou son of consolation. Pray ye earnestly in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or the theotokion —

We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, for from thee shone forth Christ, the Sun of righteousness, Who hath great mercy.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of Saint Bartholemew, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of Saint Barnabas.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

A Reading from the Acts of the Holy Apostles, §28 \[11:19-30\]

In those days, the apostles who were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phœnicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only. And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrenia, who, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the Church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch. Who, when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith: and many people were added unto the Lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul: and when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the Church, and taught many people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Cæsar. Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judæa: which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Luke, §51 \[10:16-21\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “He who heareth you heareth Me; and he who despiseth you despiseth Me; and he who despiseth Me despiseth Him Who sent Me.” And the seventy returned again with joy, saying: “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name.” And He said unto them: “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said: “I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.”

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

