The 13th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Aquilina

& the Holy Hierarch Triphyllius, Bishop of Leucosia in Cyprus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera of the saints: 3 for the holy martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign…” —

Knowing thee to be an incorrupt bride adorned by the Holy Spirit, we celebrate thy holy memory, O passion-bearing martyr. We piously bow down before thy relics and holy shrine, and ever draw forth healing for our passions, honoring thee with faith, O most lauded Aquilina.

To thy Bridegroom, O most honored one, thou didst offer as a gift the dismemberment of thy limbs. Wherefore, having counted thee worthy of the all-radiant bridal chambers, the Transcendent One doth illumine thee with the light of divine glory. Before Him dost thou stand, rejoicing. O Aquilina, do thou earnestly entreat Him in behalf of us who with faith glorify thy suffering.

Held fast, O all-praised one, by the desire of thy Creator, thou didst depict His sufferings with thine own flesh, enduring each threefold wave of pain. And now thou livest in the heavens, arrayed in an imperishable crown and glory immune to pain, and beholding what the ranks of angels see, O divinely inspired Aquilina.

And 3 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O glorious father Triphyllius, excellently enlightened with many tears, thou didst take wing to the first Cause of the good, and wast shown to be a pillar of light, illumining with thy words and miracles all who with divinely dutiful thought ever approach thee. Wherefore, we honor thee and call thee blessed.

O sacred father Triphyllius, honorably adorned like a second Aaron with the plumage of vestments, thou now beholdest the Holy of holies, being within the second veil. O thine honored radiance which surpasseth the mind! O divine adornment of holy hierarchs, wherein thou sharest!

Possessed of a merciful soul, of pure thought, of a straightforward heart, an undefiled faith, an unfeigned love and the dignity of hierarchal rank, O father, thou art enrolled with honor in the choirs of the fathers. Wherefore, we all honor thee with sacred hymns and piously praise and call thee blessed.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Rejoice, enlightenment of souls, forgiveness of the sinful, correction of the negligent! Rejoice, consolation and joy, helper of the sorrowful. Rejoice, O good one, healing of our ailing souls! Rejoice, mediatress, our reconciliation with God, O pure one, who art more holy than all the seraphim!

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, the Virgin, Thy Mother, O Master, cried aloud: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost endure wounding unjustly, O Physician Who healeth the infirmity of man and by Thy loving-kindness dost deliver all from corruption?”

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV —

Thy ewe-lamb Aquilina crieth out to Thee with a loud voice, O Jesus: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I pass through many struggles; I am crucified and buried with Thee in Thy baptism, and suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; I die for thee, that I might live with Thee. As an unblemished sacrifice accept me, who sacrifice myself with love for Thee.” By her prayers save Thou our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in the same tone —

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and a teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility and riches through poverty. O father Triphyllius, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two for the saints, with a total of 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the holy martyr, the composition of Joseph, the acrostic whereof is: “Accept this hymnody, O Aquilina who doest good”, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Thou, O all-glorious one, dost truly stand in the heavens before Christ, thy Bridegroom. Wherefore, by thy supplications, O honored one, do thou glorify those on earth who piously glorify thee, and with thee make them partakers of glory who chant: For gloriously is He glorified!

The grace of the Spirit, which dwelt within thee, made thy soul pure, O glorious one, and thou becamest all the more comely in the wounding of thy body. Wherefore, O all-praised one, the Bridegroom betrothed to Himself thee who art utterly pure and incorrupt.

When of old the winter of deception cruelly lay upon the ends of the earth, thou, O divinely wise, right wondrous and glorious Aquilina, didst attain unto the spring-time of life and didst lay hold of the trophy of victory, as a true martyr of the Lord Almighty, filled with the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* He Who is of the same essence with the unoriginate Father entered into thy womb, becoming man; and He hath saved us who are weighed down by evil and enslaved to the deception of the enemy, O Mary, Bride of God. Wherefore, with faith and love we call thee blessed.

Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

With faith let us all offer praise unto God, Who adorned His favored one with all manner of virtues and raised him up as a second Moses.

Having ascended the mountain of the virtues, O father Triphyllius, thou didst receive the divine law, and with the tablets of thy thought didst reveal the beauty of thy soul.

Thou wast shown to be noetically emitting a sweet fragrance, O venerable one; for thou didst put forth healing for all mortals, O father, manifesting thyself as a divinely inspired poultice for the faithful.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the wellspring of life, O pure Virgin Mary, who gavest birth unto the Lord and Author of creation, the Life of all, bedewing those who glorify thee with faith.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

By grace thou didst weave a robe of light, O glorious martyr Aquilina, dying it with thy blood in sacred manner.

Thou wast manifestly wounded with divine love, O most honored one; wherefore, thou didst steadfastly endure cruel wounding and pangs.

The Lord and Deliverer wholly sanctified thee, O honored Aquilina, Who loved Him with all thy might and soul.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, we know thee to be the unwedded Bride and pure habitation of Jesus, who art more holy than the cherubim.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Thy memory hath shone forth radiantly, like the sun upon the world, O holy hierarch; and it sheddeth light upon the hearts of us who observe it faithfully with grace.

A garden of the divine Spirit, which put forth divine grapes, thou hast noetically pressed out the wine of faith for us, the faithful.

Taking up the sword of divine grace, thou didst cut down the rage of Belial, and hast shown thyself to us as a victor in Christ, O sacred one.

*Theotokion:* Neither the tongue of mortal men, nor the mind of the incorporeal, can speak of thy birthgiving; for thou gavest birth to the Creator in manner past nature and understanding, O Theotokos.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…” —

Receiving the purity of virginity through the excellence of thy life, O Triphyllius, thou wast the first hierarch of Leucosia, and wast shown to be its evangelizer and instructor in the knowledge of God. Wherefore, with joy we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O adornment of hierarchs!

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Illumined with the divine light of the virtues, thou wast adorned with an athlete’s wreath, O all-glorious and honored one; and, comely in beauty, thou wast truly betrothed to the Master of all by thy faith, O thou who art undefiled and incorrupt. Wherefore, thou hast been counted worthy of the heavenly bridal chambers, having contended well and vanquished the evil one, O divinely wise Aquilina. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Possessed of the zeal of faith, O all-blessed one, thou didst put forth ripe fruit thereof; for thou didst put to shame the legions of the enemy and slay the devil, O Triphyllius. Entreat Christ God, O venerable father, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion —

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O all-pure Virgin Mother who alone dost surpass the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications cleanse me who, more than all others, am become dust, defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, and grant me great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who had sprung forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest of Thine own will, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

In the weakness of thy body thou didst cast down the prideful serpent, doing battle splendidly and setting at nought the rage of the tyrants.

In the splendor of thy martyrdom and the divine beauty of thy virginity, O Aquilina, thou wast an excellent bride for the Master.

The torrents of thy blood quenched the fire of polytheism, and the streams of thy miracles wash away the infirmities of men.

*Theotokion:* By the slumber of despondency, O Maiden, hath the sleep of sin stolen over me; but rouse me to repentance by thy vigilant supplication.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Thou wast truly shown to be an all-pure fruit, O all-blessed hierarch, and the divine Spirit made His abode within thee.

Illumined by the divine Spirit, thou didst direct thy mind to things above, and didst struggle mightily against deception, O father.

Thou didst shepherd thy reason-endowed lambs like sheep, O all-blessed one, and didst lead them to Christ by thy words.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, have ever acquired thee as an insuperable rampart and mighty hope amid perils.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

When thou wast assailed by falsehood as by a raging sea, O martyr Aquilina, thou wast then shown to be guided by the grace of Christ.

Looking to the victor’s wreaths, O martyr, thou didst steadfastly endure the dismemberment of thy limbs and a violent death.

Astonishing thy very adversaries, thou wast radiantly adorned with thy comely beauty and majesty of soul.

*Theotokion:* All who have been delivered from the ancestral condemnation by thy birthgiving cry out to thee: Rejoice, O joyous and all-hymned one!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Arrayed mightily in divine grace, O wise and glorious one, thou didst cast down the power of the enemy and, as an initiate of the mysteries of God, didst receive a crown from Him as is meet.

Lifting the eyes of thy soul up to heaven, O glorious father, thou didst plumb the depths of divine doctrines, revealing the radiance of the Trinity to men.

Putting on the armor of God, O sacred one, thou didst put to shame the arrogance of the enemy in council, and, having crushed his head with divine doctrines, thou rejoicest eternally.

*Theotokion:* The Son, Who was born of thee, incarnate without seed, O Theotokos, have we, the faithful, recognized as true God and man by nature. Wherefore, we glorify thee.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the sea monster, O Lord. Save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

Thou didst desire to follow the glorious sufferings of Christ and with manly wisdom didst endure beatings and the dismemberment of thy holy body, O virgin.

Thou didst endure all manner of pangs and didst scorn the pain of the fire. Wherefore, O Aquilina, thou dost ease all our pain by thy supplications.

Looking down from above, the choir of the angels was amazed at thine endurance, O glorious virgin, and at how in the flesh thou didst vanquish the incorporeal foe by grace.

*Theotokion:* That man might become divine, God showed Himself to be a man, O Virgin, born ineffably of thy womb. And what He was, that did He remain immutably.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Like Enoch thou wast translated in spirit from earthly things to the heavenly, O blessed one; and as is meet thou didst receive incorruption.

Leucosia had thee as its confirmation, O father, its pastor and instructor in the mysteries of grace, like a radiant sun illumining the world with miracles.

By thy supplications, O father, thou unshakable foundation of the Church, do thou now make firm the temple of my soul, which is shaken by all the wiles of the enemy.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, who art greater and more holy than the heavenly powers: in manner transcending nature thou didst contain the infinite Word within thy womb.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

Having utterly purified thy soul with the beauties of thy virginity and attained the heights by martyrdom, O most honored Aquilina, wounded with the love of Christ Thy Bridegroom, thou standest before Him with the angels in gladness. With them cease thou never to pray for us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Suffering, thou didst disdain the body, O divinely wise Aquilina, looking instead to heavenly rewards, light, glory, godly beauty and divine gladness.

Possessed of a body undefiled and a heart united to the Lord, O pure one of godly wisdom, thou didst stand before the tribunal, denouncing the ignorant tyrant.

Thou didst exchange the corrupt world for the incorrupt life of heaven, transitory food for everlasting, and a mortal betrothed for the immortal Bridegroom, O virgin.

*Triadicon:* With hymns do we honor the single divine Monarchy, the all-glorious Trinity of Persons, Which is simple in nature; and we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The all-wise children did not worship the golden body, but entered into the flame themselves and mocked the gods of the heathen. They cried aloud in the midst of the flame, and the Angel bedewed them, saying: The prayer of your mouths hath already been heard.

Rationally, through abstinence thou didst refuse to worship the idol of the passions, and the furnace of thy body did not consume thy dew, O father; filled with the Holy Spirit, thou didst cry out with boldness: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Thou wast shown to be the first-ordained and mighty pastor of Leucosia, O wise one, and didst bring to thy Master a great harvest of people. Wherefore, with faith we ask: in thine intercession pray thou to God for thy flock, that we be delivered from all corruption.

The living wellspring of thy tears doth astonish all, O wise and all-glorious Triphyllius; for, ever enriched by the streams of healings, we hymn the grace of thy relics and say: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou steadfast refuge, awesome intercessor and insuperable rampart for those who are beset with afflictions and ­tempest-tossed by tribulations: by thine entreaties to thy Son save thy servants from all manner of temptations.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Trampling down the fire and flame in the furnace, the divinely eloquent youths did chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Illumined by the radiance of purity and arrayed in the stains of thy blood as in embroidered vesture, O virgin Aquilina, thou standest before Christ our God.

Thou didst offer thyself to Christ our God as a pure sacrifice, an all-radiant offering and an incense of sweet savor, O divinely wise Aquilina.

Thy holy body, which lieth in the tomb, O all-glorious Aquilina, healeth the divers ailments of men and dispelleth the harm wrought by the demons.

*Theotokion:* In manner past recounting didst thou give birth unto the incorruptible Word Who delivereth us from all corruption; wherefore, O Virgin, we all glorify thee.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst open the path of salvation to all in Leucosia, being the first to occupy the cathedra of its Church, O wise and glorious hierarch, receiving it through the divine effulgence as was meet.

Entreat Christ our Benefactor without ceasing, O sacred one, that He deliver those who have recourse to thy shrine from misfortunes and the temptations of the enemy.

The choirs of the angels were amazed, the multitudes of the demons were seized with great trembling, and every created being was moved to awe by thy fasting, O wise one. And the human race honoreth thee as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Forget not the cry of those who pray to thee, O awesome intercessor, but by thy supplications rescue us from all pain and every threat, for thy maternal entreaty persuadeth God.

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

With steadfast intent, the virgin was crucified for the Savior Who had been nailed to the Cross, and she trampled upon the head of the serpent.

Comely is thy beauty, O Aquilina who art most rich, and the great nobility of thy soul is now manifest in godly fashion.

United with the choirs of the incorporeal ones and the assemblies of the martyrs, O all-praised one, entreat God in behalf of us all.

Thine all-glorious memory, O martyr Aquilina, doth summon all joyfully to hymn thy glorious pangs and sufferings.

*Theotokion:* We cry to thee with the cry of the angel, O all-pure one: Rejoice, O salvation of all men and divine crowning of the glorious martyrs!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Lifting the eye of thy soul up to the heights of heaven, thou didst recognize the effulgence of the Trinity, O wise one, and, illumining mortal men, in godly manner thou hast enriched all with divine illumination. Wherefore, we magnify thee in hymns as is meet.

To the inhabitants of Leucosia thou wast shown to be a noetic beacon, O wise one, passing through the outlying lands, adorning them in godly manner with the knowledge of Christ, as with sacred rays of inspiration, and straightway delivering the world from deception.

Having assembled now, we the faithful entreat thee, O father: Pray thou ever unto Christ, that He deliver us from famine, barbarian depredations and all misfortune, in that He is mighty, that we may magnify thee in hymns as is meet.

*Theotokion:* What words of mortal men can speak of the unutterable birthgiving of thine ineffable Offspring? For God was born a Babe, and thou wast the handmaid who bore the Son Who was born, O Mother and Theotokos. Wherefore, we hymn thee and thy birthgiving.

