The 14th Day of the Month of June

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Elisha

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints

Methodius, Patriarch of Constantinople

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the prophet, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

Rejoice, O all-wise Elisha, for, having purified thy mind of the passions of the body, thou didst receive rays of the Spirit, O glorious one, which thou didst transmit unto all others. And thou wast shown to be wholly radiant; wherefore, thou hast made thine abode amid never-waning light. Pray thou ever in behalf of us who praise thee.

Elijah the zealot left thee resplendent in a twofold measure of grace, O blessed Elisha, when he was shown to be a truly airborne warrior. And emulating him, by grace thou didst stem the rushing torrent of the river, and didst cross over, O glorious one, joyfully adorning thyself and magnifying Christ.

Of old, the prayer of the Shulamite woman’s faith entrusted her child unto thee, as a divine prophet marvellous in sanctity, and thou didst raise him up from the dead; and again, through salt thou didst manifestly transform undrinkable water into potable. Thou workest countless miracles through the grace of the all-accomplishing Spirit, O blessed one: wherefore, we hymn thee.

And 3 stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same tone & melody —

O divinely wise father Methodius, like a lion, by the roaring of thine all-wise teachings thou didst terrify John the Grammarian, the sly fox, for he could not endure thy rebuke, and, wicked wretch, was felled by a blow from thy sword; wherefore, as a champion of the Orthodox people, thou didst not leave the flock of Christ to perish.

O Methodius, thou art the confirmation of Orthodoxy, the shepherd of the Church, the adornment of monks, a river full to overflowing with the waters of the Spirit, a cup pouring forth drink of surpassing sweetness, a beacon illumining the ends of the world, a two-edged sword honed to sharpness by grace, which cutteth down hordes of the ungodly.

O glorious Methodius, thou art a model of confession, the foundation of holy hierarchs, an instrument winded by God, playing the melody of doctrine, full of piety, a dwelling-place of wisdom, an abyss of love, an ever-flowing stream of mercy, a bowl pouring forth the drink of compunction, a right flourishing garden of paradise.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Today hath the divine coming of the prophets shone forth, mystically beckoning to the souls of those who love the feasts of the Church. He who mounted the chariot which traverseth the heavens, the star of the never-waning East, with Elisha, the wondrous man, doth broaden the streams of the new Jordan, making clear the proclamation of piety, and manifestly portraying by a double image the twofold blessing of the harmonious glory of the Old and the New for those who with faith celebrate their most festive memorial.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion; or the theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

Beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the tree of the Cross, she who knew not wedlock said, weeping: “O my sweet Child, why hast Thou left me alone who gave Thee birth? O unapproachable Light of the all-unoriginate Father, haste Thou and glorify Thyself, that they who glorify Thy divine sufferings may receive divine glory!”

Aposticha from the Pentecostarion, or from the Octoechos; whereupon we chant the following sticheron, with its stichos, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

The Church of God doth clothe itself today in gladness, and rejoiceth, crying aloud: “My beauty hath shone forth beyond that of all other cities! For, lo! the glorious Methodius, the great treasure of holy hierarchs, hath passed over to the heavens! Come, therefore, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, ye assembly of the Orthodox, and, forming a choir round about his divine shrine, and receiving streams of healing therefrom, pray ye unto Christ God, that He deliver the whole world from all heresy!”

Glory…, in Tone VI —

O prophet and herald of Christ, thou art never absent from the throne of His majesty, and, ministering in the highest, thou dost ever intercede for everyone who is sick. Wholly glorious, thou dost bless the whole world. Ask thou cleansing for our souls.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion; or the theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

Beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, the most immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, maternally lamenting: “O my Son and my God, save those who hymn Thee with love!”

Troparion of the prophet, in Tone IV —

The angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, the second forerunner of the coming of Christ, the glorious Elijah from on high sent down upon Elisha the grace to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. Wherefore, he poureth forth healings upon those who honor him.

Glory…, this troparion of the holy hierarch, in the same tone —

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a ruler of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility and riches through poverty. O father Methodius, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “With gladness I hymn the grace of Elisha”, in Tone V —

*Irmos:* To God the Savior, Who led His people in the sea with dryshod feet and drowned Pharaoh and all his army, let us chant alone, for He is glorious.

Hymns chanted unto God from the beginning, wherewith the Hymned One is hymned, resplendent in the praises of the prophets, do I sing, hymning Him Who hath glorified them, in that He is glorious.

Abandoning the plough, the prophet acquired his rank with spiritual radiance, receiving the fleece from the hand of the prophet, for he hath been glorified.

As from the beginning Thou didst know Elisha’s disposition toward a higher calling, O Christ, Thou didst illumine him with the grace of prophecy, O almighty Savior, for Thou hast been glorified.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mother of God, unceasingly entreat God, Who became incarnate of thee yet did not separate Himself from the bosom of the Father, that He save from all misfortunes those whom He created.

Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* O Thou Who smote Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharaoh in the sea, Thou didst save from slavery the people who like Moses chanted a hymn of victory, for Thou hast been glorified.

Enslaving thy body amid fasting, O venerable one, thou didst anoint thy soul with divine ascents, and hast poured forth the inexhaustible sustenance of the kingdom on high.

Armed with the noetic sword of the Spirit, and arrayed in faith as in a breast-plate, thou didst manfully fell hordes of heretics, O most blessed father Methodius.

Thy divine mouth was an ever-flowing river for the Church, truly drowning the heretical, O venerable Methodius, but drying and giving drink unto the faithful.

*Theotokion:* With hymns let us honor the all-pure Mary, the animate tabernacle, the ark and table, the mountain from whence the Lord of all was cut without the aid of men’s hands.

Ode III

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, establish Thou my mind, that I may hymn and glorify Thy saving ascension.

Putting away earthly attachments, thou didst serve the Spirit Who breatheth fire, conversing with ministers pleasing unto God.

In the Spirit thou didst receive the gifts of thy teacher twofold, not having compromised his ascent by slothfulness.

Having stood before Elijah with lamentation and rent thy garment, thou didst part the streams of the Jordan with his mantle.

*Theotokion:* O pure Bride of God, unceasingly beseech Him Who issued forth from thy womb, that He deliver those who hymn thee from the deception of the devil.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord Who dost establish the thunder and formest the wind: make me steadfast, that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; for none is as holy as Thee, O our God.

Thy tongue was a shower-laden cloud, O Methodius; for it watereth the hearts of the pious with discourse, and ever choketh the tares of the ungodly.

Directing the discourse of faith, thou didst undergo the testing of wounds, O father, and wast condemned to imprisonment in a dark dungeon; wherefore, in gladness thou hast passed over into never-waning light.

Thou didst hymn the sufferings of the martyrs and didst share in their joy which cannot be taken away, O father Methodius, having suffered exceedingly through never-ending tribulations and wounds.

*Theotokion:* Announcing “Rejoice!” to the Virgin, Gabriel declared: “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, O Virgin, and thou shalt conceive the Lord and Savior in thy womb.”

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…” —

Thou didst struggle on earth like an incorporeal being, O Methodius, and hast inherited the heavens, as one who explained the veneration of icons to the ends of the earth; for, afflicted greatly with toils and pangs, thou didst not cease boldly to denounce those who cast aside the icons of Christ.

*Ikos:* Grant me remission of sins, that I may fittingly hymn thy struggles, O all-glorious ­Methodius; for thou wast cast into a deep pit, that unto the radiance of divine effulgence thou mightest release souls buried in the abyss, manifestly teaching the whole world to bow down before the divine and truly ineffable image of Christ, denouncing those who cast aside the icons of Christ.

Sessional hymn of the prophet, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb…” —

With divine foresight the great Elijah took thee as his disciple, O wise Elisha, and showed thee forth as a prophet shining with the Spirit. Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy memorial today with right honorable wisdom, we honor thee with him, O glorious one.

Glory…, sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…” —

Having shone forth like a radiant sun, O father Methodius, with thy doctrines thou dost illumine the whole world, and drivest away the darkness of heresy.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

Stretching forth thine all-pure hands, O Virgin Mother, cover those who place their trust in thee and cry aloud to thy Son: Grant Thy mercies unto all, O Christ!

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding thy Son upon the Tree, O all-pure one, thou didst feel as though thy womb was rent asunder, and didst cry out piteously: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, of Thine arising from the tomb, and have glorified Thine invincible power.

As Thou didst the waters of old, so now by grace heal thou my barren mind, through the supplications of Elisha.

Thou wast divinely enriched by speaking of heavenly things, and by means of a bear thou didst chastise the misbehavior of the children.

Thou wast shown to be adorned with virginity, O glorious one, shining like a beacon from afar upon those sitting in the darkness of falsehood.

The tongue which is moved by the Spirit cannot keep silent concerning thy wondrous corrections in this life, O Elisha.

*Theotokion:* We, the faithful, truly glorify thee, O unwedded Theotokos, and we flee to thy haven.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thee, O God, and I was afraid; I understood Thy works, O Lord, and I was filled with awe, for the earth is full of Thy praise.

Having moistened thy lips with the noetic chalice of wisdom, O venerable father, thou hast poured forth rivers of doctrines upon us who piously celebrate thy memorial.

O venerable and holy hierarch Methodius, thou wast shown to be a desired preacher, sweet of discourse, simple of demeanor, most rich in the gifts of the Spirit.

With the noetic spear of godly discourse, O Methodius, thou didst cause the audacity of ungodliness to cease, striking it down amid the abomination of heresy.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O noetic portal, from whence the King of heaven issued forth with an ineffable voice, preserving thee immaculate, leaving thee sealed as before.

Ode V

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Rising at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! for Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

, Because of thy faith, the stillness and meekness of thy soul showed thee to be a prophet, O divinely inspired Elisha.

The divine action of thy discourses doth illumine me with spiritual words, O most blessed Elisha.

As thou standest before the Lord as one living, O Prophet Elisha, sin hath been reckoned as slain.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, cease thou never to pray to Him Whom thou didst bear, that He save the souls of us who hymn thee, O all-pure one.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Shine forth upon me the light of Thy precepts, O Lord, for my spirit riseth early unto Thee and hymneth Thee: for Thou art our God, and I flee to Thee, O King of peace.

Illumined by the light of the threefold Sun, O glorious one, thou didst piously dispel the gloomy darkness of heresy, and wast a star, illumining the faithful with splendors.

Thy tongue hath been shown to be like the sharp stylus of a quickly-writing scribe, O Methodius, truly engraving the divine law of grace upon the tablets of men’s hearts.

Bearing streams of tears like pearls amid the nights thou didst stand at prayer, O venerable one, thou didst thereby dry up torrents of sin; and thou wast shown to be a pure receptacle of the divine Spirit.

*Theotokion:* By thy supplications thou dost deliver from every evil circumstance those who have recourse unto thy protection, O Mary Theotokos; for thou art the intercessor for those who honor thee, and their hope before God.

Ode VI

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The abyss engulfed me, and the sea monster became a tomb for me; yet I cried unto Thee Who lovest mankind, and Thy right hand saved me, O Lord.

Once neither rain nor the spirit of the air filled the torrents, O prophet, but the wind of grace filled thy discourse with the action of the Spirit.

As once thou didst fill a little vessel full to overflowing with oil for the woman, O Prophet Elisha, so pray thou, that divine mercy may be poured forth upon me.

Animated by faith, through thy supplication, O prophet, the honorable woman received release from barrenness in her old age, bearing goodly offspring.

*Theotokion:* As is meet, O glorious Mary, thou boast of the Orthodox, we glorify thee as the unburnt bush, the mountain, the animate ladder, the portal of heaven.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The tempest of evil thoughts, having overtaken me, doth drag me down into the abyss of my countless sins; but, going before me, O good Helmsman, govern me and save me, as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah.

Emulating the industrious bee, thou didst gather honey from the Scriptures as from flowers, laying it up in thy heart as in a honey-comb, and pouring forth upon all the river of thy doctrines.

Thy tongue, full of spiritual discourse, set at nought the sacrilege of the blasphemers, O all-wise one, preaching the veneration of the incarnation of Christ and the image of His flesh.

Having first praised the Lord as an elder upon the judgement-seat, thou wast later raised up upon a hierarchal cathedra, shepherding the chosen people in God-pleasing manner, O father.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress Theotokos, all creation doth acknowledge thee as the only Mother of our God, for thou alone didst ineffably contain God in thy womb without being consumed by the divine fire.

Kontakion of the prophet, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

Thou wast shown to be a prophet of God, receiving a twofold measure of grace, which truly befitted thee, O blessed Elisha; for thou wast the companion of Elijah, and with him dost unceasingly entreat Christ God in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* With melodious songs we all hymn the wise Elisha who shone forth in the law of the Lord; for he was wholly filled with twofold forms of miracles, pouring forth streams of healings upon us. For he watereth the souls of the faithful and saveth them from misfortunes, as of old he saved the barren people; and he sweeteneth waters by means of salt, manifestly proclaiming the grace of baptism, and prayeth unceasingly for us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Blessed is the God of our fathers, Who saved the children who chanted unto Him in the fiery furnace.

Filled with higher wisdom, O Elisha, thou didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

As the servant of Life, O prophet, to the dead child’s mother thou didst straightway show him forth as living.

Thou didst once feed the desperate children of the prophets, rendering their destructive food harmless.

*Theotokion:* Blessed is the God of our fathers Who was born of the Virgin and made her the Theotokos.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

With the dew of divine love thou didst extinguish the burning furnace of the passions, O all-glorious one; and having been tried by perils like gold in a crucible, thou shinest like the sun.

In the midst of tribulations and persecutions thy heart was like adamant, O Methodius; and thou now shinest forth in thy fiery mouth and with heavenly beams; wherefore, we praise thee.

Like an impregnable tower thou didst remain unmoved by the assaults of perils, by the power of thy words laying low the foundation of falsehood, O all-blessed and holy hierarch Methodius.

*Theotokion:* Thou, the all-wondrous bridal-chamber, alone gavest birth unto God Who hath united Himself to mankind, and thou didst remain a virgin, O Mary Bride of God, Virgin who knewest not wedlock.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Him Who bedewed the furnace and preserved the children amid the burning flame do ye hymn, O children, bless, O priests, and exalt supremely, ye people, for all ages!

The prophet who by his command wrought purification do the children hymn, the hierarchs bless and the people exalt supremely forever.

Cleansed of dross, and held fast by desire, thou didst immaterially behold the mind of the Immaterial One; wherefore, leaping up, thou didst cry: Exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

Through grace thou didst behold things to come, and didst perceive the most precious Cross depicted in the tree, O prophet taught by God; wherefore, rejoicing, thou didst cry: Exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

The multitude of the chariots of those who surrounded thee thou didst truly bring to a halt through darkness, denouncing their mindlessness and crying aloud: Exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The angels glorify thy birthgiving, O pure Bride of God, and with them we all chant: Ye children, bless! Ye priests, hymn! Ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O earth and all that is therein, O ye seas and every shower and dew, ye heavens of heavens, light and darkness, frost and burning heat, ye children of men and priests: bless ye the Lord, praise and exalt Him supremely forever!

Thou didst cast down the arrogance of the heretics who were truly wicked, and didst raise up with thyself the horn of the faithful of the Church, O father Methodius, rendering honor to the icon of Christ. Wherefore, we hymn and honor thee with love.

Christ the Sun hath shown thee to be a most brilliant star in the firmament of the Church, O all-wise father, and with the effulgence of thy precious doctrines thou hast illumined the ends of the earth for all ages.

Like thunder did thy discourse smite the earth, O Methodius, and binding the minion of Manes, thou didst send him forth into everlasting darkness like the serpent, the father of lies.

*Theotokion:* Thou art He Who alone wast the Only-begotten on high and here below as well: begotten on high of the Father without mother, and below of Thy Mother without father. And abasing Thyself, within her thou didst take on the form of my alien nature which hath been laid low by sin.

Ode IX

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* With oneness of mind, we the faithful magnify thee, the Mother of God, who, in manner past understanding and recounting, ineffably gavest birth in time to the Timeless One.

Shaping it like a staff, as with a pruning hook, the prophet trained the material nature of men which had been raised up by the Cross.

Revealing the all-honorable character of the prophet, the Prince of life showed forth the resurrection of the body, raising up the dead man whose flesh was utterly bereft of breath.

In divine rest, O wondrous one, thou dost now entreat Christ, that those who ever bless thee may receive blessedness.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God! Him do thou beseech, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn thee with faith.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* For He Who is mighty hath magnified me; and holy is His name. And His mercy is on those who fear Him, throughout all generations.

O Methodius, thou art the adornment of holy hierarchs, the ornament of monks, a model for all the faithful, the shepherd of the Church and the foundation of the Orthodox.

Having acquired the zeal of Elijah, thou didst fill with shame the iniquitous priests who refused to venerate the image of the incarnation of the Lord, O wise Methodius.

Dancing with the angels before the face of the Deliverer, and delighting in His glory, by thy supplications deliver us from all manner of temptations, O Methodius.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thy birthgiving, and we glorify Him Who was born of thee as both God and man, O pure Virgin Mother. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He have mercy upon us.

Exapostilarion of the prophet: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars…” —

Thou didst receive from God twice the grace of Elijah, O divinely blessed Elisha, and thou givest twofold healing, to both souls and bodies, unto those who with faith ask it of thee.

Glory…: Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: Spec. Mel.: “As the disciples watched…” —

Come, ye faithful, let us hymn today the divine memory of the holy hierarch Methodius, who was cast into a subterranean pit, that he might deliver souls buried by the evil one in the darkness of ungodliness.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos who ineffably gavest birth unto God, earnestly entreat thy Son in behalf of us, thy servants, that He take pity and save those who praise thee with love.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory…, in Tone VI —

A star of piety hath shone forth from the setting of the visible sun; for Methodius, great among hierarchs, having cut through the darkness of the heretics, hath come to rest in the true East, Christ our God the Sun of righteousness; and, making his abode there with the incorporeal choirs, standing before the throne of the Trinity as one holy, as a martyr, as a hierarch, as a patriarch in deed and appearance, he asketh great mercy for us who with faith celebrate his sacred memory.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion; or theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

“Mindful of Thy seedless conception and ineffable nativity, I marvel exceedingly at how Thou hast deigned to die as a malefactor, O my Son!” the all-pure one cried aloud.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

*Stichos:* The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.

General Epistle of James, § 57

\[Jas. 5: 10-20\]

Brethren: Take the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy who endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he who converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel is among those who call upon His name.

*Stichos:* A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart.

Gospel according to Luke, § 14 \[Lk. 4: 22-30\]

At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of the mouth of Jesus, and they said: “Is not this Joseph’s son?” And He said unto them: “Ye will surely say unto Me this proverb, ‘Physician, heal thyself’: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country.” And He said, “Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth: many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman who was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.” And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong. But He passing through the midst of them went His way, and came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

