The 16th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr & Wonderworker Tychon of Amathus

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Tikhon of Kaluga\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you…” —

Possessed of a life equal to that of the angels, by spurning pleasures thou didst show thyself to be a vessel of God; wherefore, O wise Tychon, as is meet He ordained thee for the people as a divine hierarch, and showed thee to be a pillar and ground of the Faith, O divinely inspired one, pasturing thy flock by the waters of Orthodoxy, O sacred one.

Full of divine understanding, thou wast shown to be a shepherd most wise, piously nurturing the reason-endowed flock on the grass of true doctrines; wherefore, we honor now thy holy festival, glorifying aloud the Lord Who hath glorified thee. O most blessed and divinely wise Tychon, pray thou that our souls be saved.

God, Who ever glorifieth those who glorify Him, hath glorified thee with miracles; for during thine honored and divine commemoration, O wise father, ripe grapes are seen by those who hymn the all-glorious wonder. And partaking thereof, the faithful who glorify thee as is meet receive sanctification and benefit.

But if Alleluia is to be chanted at matins instead of “God is the Lord…”, the following stichera of the Theotokos are chanted before the preceding stichera of the saint, in the same tone & melody —

Strange and awesome is the mystery of thy seedless birthgiving, O pure Virgin, surpassing in its greatness all human understanding. For the many-eyed cherubim dare not gaze upon Him, and all the ranks of the holy angels fear Him to Whom thou gavest birth in the flesh for us, yet Who hath not separated Himself from the Father’s essence. And we glorify thee Who gavest birth to Him, O Bride of God.

To whom hast thou likened thyself, O wretched soul, in nowise awakening unto repentance? And wherefore dost thou not fear the fire which awaiteth the evil? Arise, and summon her who alone is quick to help, and cry aloud: “O Mother of God, entreat thy Son and our God, that He deliver me from the snares of the deceiver!”

O Mistress, help of all, send down drops of thy mercy upon me who have fallen into the dark abyss and am ever cruelly engulfed by the threefold billows of life; grant me thy helping hand, and vouchsafe unto me the portion of the elect and the righteous, in that thou gavest birth to the Abyss of mercy, Who loveth mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same melody —

O all-immaculate and pure one, who gavest birth to the unbearable Fire Who burneth up sins and bedeweth the faithful: by thy supplications consume thou the tinder of my boundless offenses, and with thy dew cool thou my soul, which withereth away through the passions, that with a loud voice I, thy servant, may magnify thy mercy and power.

Stavrotheotokion —

When she beheld her Lamb stretched out on the tree of the Cross of His own will, the ewe-lamb cried out maternally, lamenting in pain: “O my soul, what is this strange thing that I see? As Thou art the Lord Who granteth life unto all, how is it that Thou diest, O Long-suffering One, bestowing resurrection upon mortals? I glorify thy great condescension, O my God!”

Troparion, in Tone I —

A desert-dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker wast thou shown to be, O our God-bearing father Tychon. For, having acquired heavenly gifts through fasting, vigilance and prayer, thou dost heal the infirm and the souls of those who have recourse unto thee with faith. Glory to Him Who gave thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who worketh healings for all through thee!

AT MATINS

Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the holy hierarch, with 4 troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Full of visions transcending the mind, O blessed Tychon, and delighting in the divine radiance thereof, grant a voice of grace unto those who hymn thee, whereby we may be shown forth as worthy to recount thy virtues.

Choosing the higher path from thy youth, thou didst regard thine inherited patrimony as but dust; and distributing it to the poor, thou didst receive recompense an hundredfold, trusting in the words of thy Lord, O blessed one.

He Who resideth in the highest, finding thy heart to be an abode of the virtues, made His habitation within thee and rested in thee; for with the Father He made within thee a dwelling-place purified beforehand by the Spirit, as He said.

*Theotokion:* God became man through thy womb, O all-pure one, yet preserved thee a Virgin still after thy birthgiving; and having deified the nature which was contrary to His likeness, He bestowed upon it its primal dignity.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst consider gold and silver to be like dirt to be trampled underfoot, and worldly glory to be like dung; for thou didst constantly elevate thy mind toward those things which are incorrupt, and having received them, thou madest thine abode among them, O divinely wise Tychon who art most rich.

That thou mightest obtain the higher life which abideth forever, O sacred martyr Tychon, thou didst overcome corrupt life, giving thyself over to labor for all, of thine own volition.

Thou didst stand at the tribunal of the tyrant, confessing Christ the King with boldness, undaunted by wounds or death, O wondrous one; and by thy words thou didst repel the enemy.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast not spurned one clothed in fœtid raiment, who hath alienated himself from Thee through sin, O Christ; for, having assumed my poverty through the Virgin’s womb, Thou dost deify and save it in Thy surpassing goodness.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

Desiring to receive everlasting life, thou didst truly purify thy soul of the passions, O our divinely wise father; wherefore, thou didst receive the effulgence of sanctity and pourest forth gifts of healing upon those who have recourse to thy protection with faith, O blessed Tychon.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O thou who alone gavest birth to the Creator of all, who alone hast adorned mankind with thy birthgiving, O Bride of God: Deliver me from the snare of the lying foe, and set me upon the rock of the desires of Christ, earnestly beseeching Him to Whom thou gavest flesh.

Stavrotheotokion —

O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of Christ God, a sword pierced thine all-holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His own will. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Receiving the might of the Spirit, O father, thou wast shown to be invincible and tireless; and like a commander thou dost strengthen thy warriors, urging them to advance. Wherefore, though thou didst achieve thy victory without blood, thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom.

Consecrated to God, O Tychon, and observing His sacred laws, thou didst live, not as a hireling shepherd, but as one laying down thy life for the flock. Wherefore, having slain the wolves, thou hast nurtured the flock of Christ on life-giving pasturage.

The island of Cyprus doth truly cherish thine honorable memory, joining chorus with all the earth. And proclaiming that which is therein through the outpouring of miracles, it even yet calleth those who desire to see, that they may behold the garden of the all-glorious offshoot of the vine.

*Theotokion:* O Son of the Father, Who hast shown forth timelessly, Light from Light: In latter times thou didst issue forth from the Virgin’s womb, setting aright through Thyself all of Adam, who had come under death of old. Wherefore, truly honoring Thy Mother, we, the faithful, proclaim her to be the Theotokos.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Full of true vision, O glorious Tychon, thou didst denounce those who love vain wisdom, driving out the falsehood of the demons, and all the myths and abominations of Cyprus.

Possessed of a pure life, and performing works which pass understanding, thou didst stand before the divine table of Christ in most sacred manner. Wherefore, through thy supplications, O divinely wise Tychon, thou didst cast down the temples of the demons.

Being crucified, like Paul, to the world, and crucifying the world to thyself, O God-bearing Tychon who art most rich, thou didst not live for the flesh, but for God the Spirit. Wherefore, thou hast obtained those things which thou didst desire. Be thou mindful of us, thy servants.

*Theotokion:* O Mother who knewest not wedlock, thou hast been shown to be more radiant than the sun. For who in ages past ever heard of a Virgin giving suck? In thee who gavest birth to thy Creator, O Virgin Mother, were all things accomplished in godly manner.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Driving the assaults of the demons away from thy flock, and dispelling the falsehood of the idols of polytheism, O wondrous one, thou didst show thyself to be fearsome to the adversary, O divinely eloquent and all-wise Tychon.

God Who was glorified by thee, O God-bearing Tychon, glorified thee, giving thee to us who bless thee with faith as one awesome in signs and great in wonders.

Thou didst sanctify thy life, O wise one, living it honorably on earth; and, passing over from it to receive that of heaven, thou didst glorify it with miracles, O Tychon, true friend of the Master.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the Fruit of life, the divine Garden, for me who of old in the garden of paradise did by nature eat of the fruit of mortality. And eating of Him, I shall no longer be enslaved to death.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Persevering in the struggle of the love of God, O holy one, from on high thou didst receive the power of the Comforter to cast down the idols of falsehood, to save men, to cast out demons and to heal sickness. Wherefore, we honor thee as a friend of God, O blessed Tychon.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Chaldæan furnace, burning with fire, was bedewed by the Spirit through the presence of God; and the children chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

As thou wast a divine mouth, thou madest worthy men out of the unworthy, O most wondrous Tychon. Wherefore, Christ hath truly glorified thee with miracles even after thy repose.

As thou wast desirous of the hope of heaven, O father, thou didst wisely reject all the passionate attachments of the world. Wherefore, as a prophet, O wise Tychon, thou didst proclaim thy repose beforehand.

Coming together, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us pass over Cyprus with mystic visions, and let us behold the all-glorious cultivation of the garden, through which the world embraceth pure salvation.

*Theotokion:* The Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin Theotokos, poureth forth immortality upon those who partake thereof; for, having given birth unto God, thou hast released Eve from her debt.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Adorned with the beauties of the virtues, thou didst weave thy most sacred vesture, O all-praised Tychon; wherefore, telling of thine end and the manifestation of sweet fragrance, thou didst urge those round about thee to glorify the Savior, O blessed one, proclaiming: Exalt Christ supremely forever!

Ignoring the law of the body, like an incorporeal being thou didst run whither the crown of higher knowledge was prepared for thee, O divinely wise one; for it was not for flesh and blood that thou didst promise to live, O Tychon. Wherefore, thou beholdest the beauties of the kingdom of Christ, with Whom thou reignest for all ages.

Thou wast a victor over all the enemies of Christ, and didst undergo torture because of thy conscience, voluntarily sacrificing thyself, O wise Tychon; for before all thy tormenters thou didst cry aloud: “Christ is God! Let the memory of those falsely called gods perish forever!”

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Mistress, helper of the world, mighty refuge of the sorrowful, sole aid of thy servants who are in need: Rescue thine inheritance from divers misfortunes and sorrows, that we may cry out with faith: Rejoice, O joy and salvation of the world!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore, we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

O Tychon, accept this sacred hymnody offered unto thee from unworthy lips, in recompense granting the deliverance from sins through thy supplications to God; for thee do all of us who faithfully honor thy memory set forth as our advocate.

The pure and all-holy Spirit anointed thee with the oil of gladness, O all-glorious one, adorned thee with a multitude of gifts, and vouchsafed thee to reign with Him gloriously, O most hallowed Tychon, adornment and boast of priests.

O thy gracious miracles, O sacred Tychon! The tongue of man cannot recount what he hath seen! For the shoot of the vine which before was desiccated hath now, at thy ready gesture, all-gloriously put forth ripe grapes!

By thy supplications grant me victory over the passions, I pray, O Tychon, and vouchsafe that I who bless thee ardently with love may obtain the love of God and the delight of good things, and may receive His beauties.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God who gavest birth to salvation for the world, by thy supplications save me from the multifarious and nefarious temptations which assail me; for upon thee have I, thy servant, faithfully set my hope of salvation.

