The 18th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Leontius

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you…” —

What shall we call thee, O glorious one? Offering of Hellas, in that thou didst hail therefrom? Cleansing of Phœnicia, in that thou wast martyred there? Lamp, for thou didst shine forth in the darkness? Valiant one, in that thou wast not vanquished by those who beat thee? Far-reaching is thy fame, O most blessed Leontius! Pray thou, that our souls be saved.

What shall we name thee, O passion-bearer? Soldier of Christ, in that thou wast a destroyer of the enemy? Ruler of the passions, in that thou wast an athlete of piety? Feeder of the hungry, in that thou didst love the poor? righteous one, in that thou wast a zealot of heavenly wisdom? Divers were thy sufferings and most splendid thy contest. Pray thou, that our souls be saved.

Who doth not marvel at thee, O Leontius? For, receiving a wellspring of incorruption as a dweller in paradise, thou pourest forth rivers of benefaction upon the faithful, without fee dost offer abundant gifts to all those who thirst, and dost gladden those who partake of the waters of goodness. Pray thou, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone I —

O all-praised athlete Leontius, neither fire, nor wounding, nor the sword were able to separate thee from the love of Christ; but, suffering manfully in the midst of the tormenters, thou didst abolish the offerings made to idols, O divinely wise crown-bearer, and now dost dance in the heavens. Earnestly pray thou for our souls.

Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God and gazing upon His long-suffering, the pure Mother said, weeping: “Woe is me, O my Child most sweet! How is it that Thou ­sufferest undeservedly, O Word of God, that Thou mayest save mankind?”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone IV —

Let heaven revel in splendor today, and let us earthly faithful rejoice in the memory of the martyr Leontius; for this day which hath arrived is crowned, not with irrational sacrifices, but with the sacrifice of praise, with spiritual flowers. For, standing with us, adorned, offering the unbloody service to the Bestower of crowns, he doth radiantly offer up entreaty, that those who faithfully keep his memory may attain unto the courts of paradise.

Now & ever…: theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

The all-pure one, beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, His side pierced by a spear, cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the ungrateful people recompensed Thee for the good things Thou didst do for them? And dost thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved One? I marvel at thy voluntary crucifixion, O Compassionate One!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Leontius received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyr, the composition of John the monk, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

Thy virtue is not subject to the laws of praise, O Leontius, favorite of Christ; for He is thy boast and wealth which cannot be taken away.

Desiring an unsullied soul of supernatural qualities, and having adorned thy body with virginity, thou didst splendidly set forth on the path of the Most High.

Wielding might against falsehood, O venerable and glorious Leontius, thou didst ever praise the honor of martyrdom to Him Whom thou didst desire.

*Theotokion:* To thee do we all hasten, as to a steadfast champion, O Theotokos, moving thee to supplication, that thy flock may be delivered from every evil circumstance.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Having acquired a right beautiful character, wisdom and grace from God, O Leontius, thou wast shown to be a true athlete and a chosen martyr.

“Lay down your life for the living God,” thou didst say to thy peers, O Leontius, “and as soldiers serve ye the King Who abideth ­eternally!”

Thy honeyed and God-loving tongue poured forth words of piety and brought down the blasphemers, the minions of ungodliness.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Mother who knewest not wedlock, who contained God the Word within thy womb and gavest birth to Him incarnate, both God and man.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

Taking up the Cross as a weapon, thou didst go off to do battle with invisible foes, suffering valiantly. Wherefore, having destroyed their power, thou hast received the grace of miracles, O all-glorious martyr Leontius, praying that we be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure and most immaculate one who knewest not man, and who alone gavest birth in time to the timeless Son and Word of God: With the holy and honored patriarchs and martyrs, with the prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us cleansing and great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

Thine all-pure Mother, as she beheld Thee, O Word of God, suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and awesome wonder, O my Son? Why is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death, desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, and the earth hath been filled with Thy glory, O Christ. Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

He who was beset by the wrath of the demons mercilessly wounded thee, who art swathed in the love of God, O martyred athlete Leontius.

Boldly didst thou urge toward the truth him who wished to overtake and lay hold of thee, considering him to be a blessed one of promise, O martyred athlete Leontius.

He Who, for thy sake, was nailed to the Tree in the flesh, seeing thee bound to a tree for His sake, filled thee with strength and grace.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O most hymned Theotokos, who art more exalted than the ranks of the cherubim and in the flesh didst bear God, seated, upon thine arm.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord Who acquired us, the chosen people, by Thy Blood, grant us Thy peace, preserving Thy flock in oneness of mind.

Led in like a sheep ready for the slaughter, O most glorious Leontius, of thine own will thou didst stand up for Christ before the tyrant’s tribunal.

He who was guilty of falsehood sought to drain away the strength of thy soul, disparaging the crucified Lord as a human malefactor.

“May the gods perish, who manifestly did not create the heaven and the earth, for the Crucified One is the Fashioner of all!”, thou didst say, O martyr.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O pure and all-pure one who knewest not wedlock, O holy Mary, Bride of God, for Thou gavest birth unto God, Who hath rendered our race celestial.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Though peaceable to those who have recourse to thee with faith, and possessed of discourse seasoned with divine salt, O Leontius, thou wast shown to be stern towards the enemies of Christ.

Rejoicing, Thy faithful servant Leontius gave himself over as a witness of Thy kingdom, O Christ, and Thine enemies were unable to bear the truth.

Like wild beasts the iniquitous burned with rage and fell upon the martyr, as though he were their prey, pitilessly to rend asunder the invincible one.

*Theotokion:* We who hymn thine all-holy birthgiving have no other helper than thee, O all-pure Mistress. Wherefore, we pray thee: render thy Son reconciled with thy servants.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Thou didst confound the wicked plots of the tyrants, didst denounce the ungodly religion of the Greeks, and didst shine forth the knowledge of God upon all men in thy doctrines of piety, O divinely wise martyr. Wherefore, with love we honor thy memory, O all-wise Leontius.

*Ikos:* I call upon the Lord, the Mediator between God and men, Who assumed the lowliness of us mortals from the pure Theotokos who knew not wedlock, was crucified, and hath raised mankind up from corruption, that I may now praise the wise Leontius, and may recognize his splendid and beautiful sufferings, which he finished well, full of courage, faith and love. Wherefore, with love we honor the wise Leontius.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Like the captive youths, with steadfast understanding the invincible Leontius trampled falsehood and the flame of his tortures underfoot, chanting to Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Unmindful of the flesh by virtue of thine indifference to suffering, as an invincible martyr thou didst mightily endure wounding for Christ, chanting to thy Creator: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Steadfastly overcoming the corrupt union of nature through wisdom and love for Christ, thou didst prefer life-bearing death, O Leontius, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Theologizing concerning the one Essence in three Hypostases — the Word, the Spirit and the Father — , the unbowed and invincible martyr cried out: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Her who, without seed, supernaturally received in her womb the immutable God Who, in His loving-kindness, mingled with men, let us piously hymn as Mother of God forever.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Christ our God, Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh and revealed it to us as a sword of salvation, O ye children, exalt supremely forever!

The martyr endured the wounding of his flesh and won a great victory over the incorporeal foe, chanting: Exalt Christ our God supremely forever!

Amid the spines of thorns thou didst radiantly stretch forth thy mind toward the Master, O martyr, crying out with love: Exalt Christ our God supremely forever!

Christ, Whom thou didst glorify with the wounds of thy flesh, is thy victory; and thou didst cry out: Ye children, exalt Christ our God supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* All the generations of men most gloriously call thee blessed, O pure Mother of God, for through thee have we been lifted up to the heavens, O Virgin Mother.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou didst show thyself to be a servant of the Trinity, O Leontius, ministering blamelessly to Him before Whom every knee doth bend in heaven and on earth, and in the nether regions. And, chanting, we magnify Him as is meet.

Desiring to look upon the glory of the Lord immaterially, thy face uncovered, thou didst divest thyself of power and authority, preaching the one Godhead in three Hypostases alone.

Thou wast glad in thy confession, and, as is meet, the Savior hath confessed thee before the Father. Him do thou entreat, O athlete, that all who magnify thy memory with faith may be saved.

*Theotokion:* Thou art more exalted than the ranks on high, O Virgin Theotokos, for thou alone didst experience the indwelling of the Most High, O blessed one. Wherefore, we all declare thee to be the Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…” —

Tried like gold by fire and torments, thou wast shown to be a worthy gift for God Most High, O most glorious athlete. Pray thou now in our behalf.

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

With thy mighty protection preserve us, thy servants, unharmed by the assault of the enemy, O pure one; for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge in needs.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplications unto Thee.

Reading from Acts of the Apostles, §29

\[12: 1-11\]

In those days, Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. \(Then were the days of unleavened bread.\) And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Passover to bring him forth to the people. Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison. And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying: “Arise up quickly.” And his chains fell off from his hands. And the angel said unto him: “Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals.” And so he did. And he saith unto him: “Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.” And he went out, and followed him; and knew not whether it were true what was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of its own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himself, he said: “Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent His angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.”

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* Those who are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Gospel according to John, §52 \[15:17-16:2\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He who hateth Me hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law: They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

