The 19th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Jude,

the Brother of the Lord

\(see also the service in honor of St. John of Shanghai & San Francisco, which follows\)

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…” —

O most wise and lauded Jude, thy sound hath gone forth into all the ends of the earth like lightning, guiding to the never-waning Light those who have been benighted by the deception of ungodliness; and, shining now therewith, ask thou great mercy for our souls. *Thrice*

O wondrous Jude, as the chariot of Christ thou didst bring down the arrogance of idolatry and mystically, by divine discourse, madest captivity captive unto life incorruptible, O glorious one. Delighting now therein, ask peace and great mercy for our souls. *Thrice*

O Jude, apostle of Christ, thou wast a disciple of our incarnate God, by Whom thou wast truly sent like a sheep among wolves, discourse by thy discourse away from impiety and towards piety and a godly understanding of the Holy Trinity. Wherefore, we praise thee. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Thou didst manifestly receive the grace of the divine Spirit, O apostle Jude, as a member of the sacred choir of the apostles. Wherefore, when the fiery breath was borne down from heaven, thou didst utterly consume the thorns of paganism, breathing forth with a tongue of fire. O preacher, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Dogmaticon, in the same tone:

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \[Jude 1-10\]

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not. And the angels who kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said: “The Lord rebuke thee.” But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \[Jude 11-16\]

Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying: “Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all who are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage.”

A Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \[Jude 17-25\]

Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto Him Who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

O apostle, thou didst receive invincible authority and power over the demons and the ability to drive away the princes of darkness by the name of Christ; and thou didst traverse the earth, shedding rays of light like the sun; and, teaching all the nations, thou didst preach the first coming of Christ the Savior, O glorious one.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Emulating the primal Goodness, the natural and all-divine Life, thou wast a man good in essence, O Jude, who art called the brother of the Lord; and thou didst show thyself to be a true disciple of Christ by the grace of thy character and the beauty of thy demeanor.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

An instrument well-tuned by the hand of God, O apostle Jude, thou wast entrusted with the task of summoning the nations, and, guiding them to the knowledge of Christ by thy words and deeds, thou didst enlighten them all to confess the true divinity of Jesus, the Savior of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Full of divine zeal, O right wondrous apostle Jude, with fervor thou wast zealous for God Almighty, and He showed thee forth as full of divine miracles; for, possessed of a strange zeal, thou didst obtain a pious demeanor through divine activity. Wherefore, exalted, and dwelling with the angels on high, O thou who beholdest God, pray to the Word, Christ our God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O new wonder greater than all the wonders of the past! For who hath ever known a mother to give birth without having known a man, and to bear on her arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? Yet it was the will of God to be born. O all-pure one, who bore Him in thine arms as an infant and hast maternal boldness before Him: cease not to pray in behalf of those who honor thee, that He have compassion and save our souls.

Troparion, in Tone I —

Knowing thee to be the kinsman of Christ and a steadfast martyr, O Jude, with sanctity we praise thee who trampled falsehood underfoot and preserved the Faith. Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy memory today, through thy supplications we receive remission of sins.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…” the troparion of the apostle, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: the theotokion: “When Gabriel announced to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin!…”

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II —

The glorious apostle fished for the nations and taught the ends of the earth to worship Thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Christ God. For his sake establish Thy Church and send down Thy blessing upon the faithful, O Thou Who alone art merciful and lovest mankind. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Through thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, have we come to share in the divine nature; for thou gavest birth to God incarnate for us. Wherefore, as is meet, we all piously magnify thee.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

As the Sun of righteousness, Christ emitted thee like a ray, to enlighten the whole world, O glorious apostle Jude; and by thy godly supplications thou dost enlighten and by thy divine light which waneth not thou dost illumine all who keep thy holy memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O hope unashamed of those who place their trust in thee, O thou who alone supernaturally gavest birth in the flesh to Christ our God: With the holy apostle entreat Him to grant cleansing of transgressions to the world and correction of life to us all, before the end.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy apostle Jude, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Divinely drawing the nations up from the abyss of ignorance with the net of thy discourse, with faith thou didst bring them forth; and as a wellspring of spiritual waters thou hast watered the whole world with grace. Wherefore, we who have been saved by thee, O divinely eloquent apostle Jude, bless thee as the close friend of Christ, crying out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having found, through thee, healing for the multifarious ailments of my flesh and the manifold passions of my soul, surcease from grief, and ready release and speedy deliverance from misfortunes and sorrows, O all-­immaculate Mistress, with unwavering faith and ­fervent heart I confess thy mercies and the many miracles wrought through thee for the children of men; and I pray that thou wilt ever preserve and keep me always beneath the shelter of thy wings.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Reading from the Gospel According to

St. John §67 \[21:15-25\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me more than these?” He saith unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He saith unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee” He said unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time: “Lovest thou Me?” And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He saith unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, who is he who betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him: “He shall not die”; but, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone I —

Thy salvific sound hath gone forth into all the earth, O apostle, beholder of God, hath illumined lost souls and brought them to Christ, enlightened by grace. Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “I make haste to hymn Jude, the beholder of God”, the composition of ­Theophanes, in Tone V —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Bringing battles to naught with His upraised arm, Christ hath overthrown horse and rider in the Red Sea, and hath saved Israel, who chanteth a hymn of victory.

O most wise Jude, initiate of the mysteries of heaven, disciple of the Savior who hast a share in true life: Move thou my tongue and direct my discourse unto thy laudation, O most blessed one.

Shouldering the yoke of the Savior and ploughing thy furrows, thou didst sow the seed of the Faith, making all things new by grace, O all-glorious one; and thou didst produce much fruit for Him Who called thee.

Thou didst acquire the incarnate Word as thy teacher, O God-seer, and, illumined by His rays, thou becamest a secondary luminary, reflecting the radiance of the primary one, O right wondrous one.

*Theotokion:* Let faith be recounted, and not a tale of miracles past understanding, all-pure one: Thou gavest birth to God the Word, the Unapproachable One, clad in humanity.

Katavasia in accordance with the typicon.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Christ Who by Thy command fixed the earth upon naught and suspended its weight unsupported: establish Thou Thy Church upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, O Thou Who alone art good and lovest mankind.

The splendor of the disciples of Christ is exalted far above all majesty; for they were His friends and peers, kinsmen and companions, and the transmitters of His mysteries.

Thy brethren praise thee, O Jude, as the brother of the preëternal Word Who appeared, shining forth from the eternal and unoriginate Father, and deigned to appear in the flesh.

Mortifying thy members on the earth, thou didst live with Christ, the Life of all, O thou who art most rich, and wast a herald of life-bearing Life for the whole world, announcing the words of life.

*Theotokion:* Behold, thou hast been blessed above all others, O pure one, hast surpassed all in holiness, art more exalted than all, and hast been shown to be higher than the heavenly hosts, in that thou art the Mother of God.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

As one who conversed with Paul, with him thou didst announce the proclamation of divine grace, O blessed apostle Jude, who hast uttered divine mysteries. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Cease thou never to pray for us all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Thou wast the brother of the Master Who was born and became the brother of all the elect, O blessed and all-wise Jude; and thou wast sent by Him as an apostle unto all the ends of the earth, sowing the word of faith among all and enlightening those who labored for the evil prince of this world in the darkness of ignorance. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion —

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer, who knewest not wedlock, as the vessel of the Comforter, O all-hymned one, haste thou to deliver me, who am the vile abode of iniquity and have become in mind the plaything of the demons, from their machinations; and make me the splendid habitation of the virtues. O radiant and incorrupt one, dispel from me the cloud of the passions, and vouchsafe unto me communion on high and the never-waning light, through thy supplications.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving Thy divine condescension prophetically, O Christ, Habbakuk cried out to Thee with trembling: Thou art come for the salvation of Thy people, to save Thine anointed ones!

Vouchsafed the apparition of the Spirit, the great apostle of the Savior became beloved, having beheld the radiance and beauty of the sight of Him.

As thou art full of grace and spiritual gifts bestowed by God, O apostle, guide those who hymn thee to the haven of salvation.

Protected by the invincible power of the all-holy Spirit, O servant of ineffable mysteries, thou drivest away the spirits of wickedness by the word of grace.

*Theotokion:* Having ineffably conceived thy Creator and God, O most immaculate Mistress, beg Him to save us from misfortunes, and to grant salvation of soul to those who hymn thee.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Thou Who art clothed in light as with a garment: I rise at dawn unto Thee, and to Thee do I cry: enlighten Thou my gloom-enshrouded soul, O Christ, in that Thou alone art compassionate!

Having left behind the shadow of the law, thou didst splendidly preach the image of the Truth, having acquired the Truth Himself as thine instructor.

Fulfilling the command of the Word, O apostle, teaching the nations with thy doctrines, thou didst travel about, baptizing them with the invocation of the Trinity.

Like heavenly rain, like dew from on high, O preacher of God, thy divine proclamation dispelled the gloom of polytheism with the preaching of the one God.

*Theotokion:* Slay thou my passions, O Theotokos, and raise up my soul, which hath been slain by sinful pleasures, O Mother of the true Resurrection.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* O Christ Master, still Thou the sea of the passions which rageth with a soul-­destroying tempest, and lead me up from corruption, in that Thou art compassionate.

Radiantly resplendent with the doctrine of divine vision and with the works of life, O apostle of Christ, thou hast illumined those who are in the abyss of ignorance.

To all men thou hast sent a splendid epistle, full of the doctrine of the Spirit, O all-wondrous one who art revealed in sanctity.

The God-seer proclaimeth heavenly things, and with miracles also he declareth the glory of God the Word Who hath appeared in the flesh for our sake.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Mistress, Mother of God, deliver me from corruption and still thou the tumult of the passions, in that thou gavest birth to the Wellspring of dispassion.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…” —

For thine adamantine mind thou wast shown to be a chosen disciple and a steadfast pillar of the Church of Christ; and thou didst preach the word of Christ to the nations, telling them to believe in the one Godhead; and, glorified by Him, thou hast received the gift of healings, to cure the infirmities of those who have recourse unto thee, O most lauded apostle Jude.

*Ikos:* Let us praise, as is meet, the true preacher of piety and mighty champion of the truth, in that he emulated Christ and was a witness to Him; for the most lauded apostle Jude manfully took His sufferings upon his own body, in that he was His disciple.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers quenched the flame and bedewed the children, who sang together: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Let us all hymn Jude, who became a God-seer by dwelling with God; and let us chant together: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Thy divinely inspired tongue, moved by the Spirit, converted the world by preaching Christ, to Whom we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

The Lord giveth thee a heavenly inheritance and an all-radiant throne, resting on which thou dost chant in godly manner: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* With mouth and mind we proclaim thee, O Theotokos and Mistress, rejoicing; for thou gavest birth to God, to Whom we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The children, forming a universal chorus in the furnace, chanted to Thee, the Creator of all: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou hast received the riches of the nations, the homage of kings, and fame, O apostle, crying out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

All the effulgence of the Comforter which descended didst thou receive, O blessed and glorious one, crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Disdaining corruptible things, thou didst prefer heavenly glory, which thou didst know is abiding, O apostle; wherefore, thou didst cry: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Come, let us hymn the beauty of Jacob, the all-pure Mary, chanting together: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O Isaiah! The Virgin hath conceived in her womb and borne a Son, Immanuel, both God and man. Orient is His name; and, magnifying Him, we call the Virgin blessed.

Illumined with outpourings of the Spirit’s effulgence, thou dost emit for all the radiance of miracles which passeth understanding, in that thou art a disciple of Emmanuel; and magnifying Him, O God-seer, we call thee blessed.

O beholder of the Only-begotten One Who abased Himself to assume the flesh for our sake: Standing now with the angelic ranks before Him, entreat Him earnestly, that He save our souls.

*Theotokion:* In giving birth to the Creator, the Father’s Fashioner of all things, O all-pure one, thou bearest the Generator and Origin, Who is possessed of incomparable and all-­exalted supremacy. Wherefore, worshipping thine Offspring, we glorify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…” —

Directing the course of thy beautiful feet upwards, O apostle Jude, thou didst ascend the path to heaven, rejoicing; and, standing before the Trinity, thou beholdest the Son and the divine Spirit in the Father; wherefore, with faith we celebrate thine all-sacred and divine memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

I am mindful of the hour of dread testing, and the multitude of mine evil deeds doth terrify and frighten me; yet have pity, O all-pure one, and by thy fervent supplication grant me salvation, for whatsoever thou desirest, thou canst do.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father…” —

Obedient to the behest of God, O all-blessed one, thou didst preach to all the incarnate Word, Who became like unto us without change, in that thou wast His cherished disciple; and being His brother in the flesh, thou wast vouchsafed to behold His glory with thy godly mind, in that thou art pure. Wherefore, we honor thee, O Jude of voice divine, and we celebrate thy memory, crying out to thee with faith: Ever entreat Christ, that He grant the world oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O apostle Jude, we call thee: a mountain which letteth fall the sweetness of the knowledge of God; a river fed by the immaterial springs of the Spirit, drying up the sea of ungodliness, and mystically watering the hearts and minds of the pious; a bright-voiced clarion announcing the divine appearance of the Word Who delivereth the world. Him do thou now entreat, to Him do thou ever pray, that He grant the world oneness of mind, peace and great mercy.

O blessed Jude, thy brethren praised thee who wast the brother of God and becamest the godly vessel of the Spirit. Illumined in purity with His splendors, thou wast shown to be a coal burning up falsehood, but enlightening the faithful with the effulgence of pure doctrines. Wherefore, we honor thee as a never-waning morning-star, and we celebrate thy holy memory, crying out to thee with faith: Ever entreat Christ, that He grant the world oneness of mind, peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ; and, having received the sign of the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou wast sent by Him to the nations who were perishing, to turn men to the light of knowledge divine, O apostle Jude. And, having finished the struggles of thy divine sufferings and divers torments, thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of Christ. Him do thou beseech, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Save thy servants from misfortunes, O Virgin Theotokos, for after God it is to thee that we flee, as to an impregnable rampart and protection.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III & 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \[Jude 1-10\]

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not. And the angels who kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said: “The Lord rebuke thee.” But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to John, §48 \[14:21-24\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “He who hath My commandments, and keepeth them, he it is who loveth Me: and he who loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him.” Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot: “Lord, how is it that Thou wilt manifest Thyself unto us, and not unto the world?” Jesus answered and said unto him: “If a man love Me, he will keep My words: and My Father will love him, and We will come unto him, and make Our abode with him. He who loveth Me not keepeth not My sayings: and the word which ye hear is not Mine, but the Father’s Who sent Me.”

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

