The 23rd Day of the Month of June

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Agrippina

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Vladimir Icon of the Theotokos\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Rome putteth thee forward like a blossoming rose of sweet fragrance, perfuming the thoughts of the faithful with the scent of the virtues and ever dispelling the stench of the passions by grace, O much-suffering Agrippina, adornment of the martyrs, confirmation of the Church, boast of virgins and abyss of miracles.

Thee, who suffered in Rome, hath Christ our God given unto Sicily as riches beyond count; and having arrived there, O glorious martyr, thou drivest away the evil multitude of demons by thine intercession. Wherefore, we bless thee and celebrate thy suffering today, O much-suffering Agrippina.

Bassa and Paula bore thee on their shoulders at the command of Him Who upbeareth all things, moving thee from place to place and making a long journey over the deep. And working awesome miracles through divine grace, O martyr Agrippina, thou didst come to rest in the place which God had appointed, becoming a place of rest for the heavy-laden, O most lauded one.

If Alleluia be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord…”, we chant these stichera of the Theotokos before the foregoing stichera of the martyr, in the same tone & melody —

Rejoice, O ray of solar brilliance, throne of the never-setting Sun, who shone forth the true Sun! Rejoice, mind radiant with divine splendors, flash of lightning illumining the ends of the earth, true luster of gold, most comely and all-immaculate one, who hast shone forth upon the faithful the Light which waneth not.

Take away the defilement of my passion-fraught heart, O most lauded Theotokos; all the wounds and corruption thereof, which come from sin, do thou wash away, O pure one; and steady the wavering of my mind, that I, thy wretched and unprofitable servant, may magnify thy power and great assistance.

O most immaculate Virgin Mother, transform the weakness and impotence of my soul into might and power, that with fear and love I may do and observe the precepts of Christ, may escape the unbearable fire, and receive through thee the inheritance of heaven and unsurpassed life, ever rejoicing.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

O Mistress, take pity on me who am crushed beneath the assaults of the demons and cast into the pit of destruction, and establish me upon the rock of the virtues; and repelling the attacks of the enemy, grant that I may keep the commandments of thy Son and our God, that I may receive remission on the day of judgment.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody —

The all-pure one, beholding Christ crucified, Who loveth mankind, His side pierced by a spear, cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the ungrateful people rewarded Thee for the good Thou hast done them? How is it that Thou art in haste to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel at Thy voluntary crucifixion, O Compassionate One.”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Thy ewe-lamb Agrippina cried out to Thee with a loud voice, O Jesus: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I pass through many struggles; I am crucified and buried with Thee in Thy baptism, and suffer for Thy sake, that I might reign with Thee; I die for Thee, that I might live with Thee. As an unblemished sacrifice accept me, who sacrifice myself with love for Thee.” By her supplications, save Thou our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

At Matins

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise Agrippina, the bride of Christ”, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

With the effulgence of the grace which illumined thee from on high drive away the gloom of mine ignorance, O martyr Agrippina, and by thy supplications grant me the grace to hymn thy wonders.

In the firmament of the Church of Christ thou hast truly shone forth more brightly than the sun, and thou hast enlightened the ends of the earth with the beams of thy struggles and miracles.

Desiring the immortal Bridegroom, the Bestower of life, thou didst offer Him thy suffering as a gift, and hast received the heavenly kingdom and an incorruptible crown, O glorious martyr.

Guided by the hand of thy Master, thou didst sail over the turbulent sea of ungodliness, O honored one; and thou didst arrive at the harbor of heavenly radiance, O Agrippina blessed of God.

*Theotokion:* The Morning-star hath shone forth in the hearts of those who honor thee, the Mother of God, with faith; and Christ, the radiant Day Who shone forth from thy womb, hath dawned, O all-hymned one.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Beaten with staves, thou didst rejoice, thereby shattering the bones of ungodliness, and crying aloud: “Nought shall separate me from Thy love, O Christ!”

Thou wast stripped of thy garments, O martyr, and dost denounce the nakedness of the enemy; wherefore, Christ hath given unto thee the vesture of incorruption.

The mouths which iniquitously spake against thee were rightly stopped, O martyr of Christ, when thou didst proclaim the mighty works of the Savior.

In vain did the servant of ungodliness have thy body stretched out upon the ground, for thou didst have thy mind stretched forth unto the Master.

*Theotokion:* The words piously uttered by Isaiah have been fulfilled, for the Virgin hath given birth to the incarnate Bestower of life and Savior of our souls.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

They who, greatly deceived, worshipped stones, with stones weighed thee down, who confessed Christ, the invincible Rock; wherefore, when thou didst repose, O glorious Agrippina, thou didst emit the radiance of all-glorious miracles, enlightening the souls of us who praise thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Bride of God, who alone gavest birth to the Creator of all, who alone hast adorned mankind with thy birthgiving: Deliver me from the snare of the deceitful foe, and establish me upon the rock of Christ’s will, earnestly entreating Him to Whom thou gavest flesh.

Stavrotheotokion —

As she beheld Thee suspended upon the Cross, O Word of God, Thine all-pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou tastest of death, O Life of all, Who, in that Thou art compassionate, hast desired to give life to the dead?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

By an angel He Who doeth the will of those who fear Him released thee from bonds and imprisonment, O martyr, who destroyed all ungodliness with the bond of the love of Christ, thy Bridegroom.

Having died for the love of Him Who hath slain all the might of death, thou pourest forth the grace of everlasting life and healest those slain by the passions, O Agrippina, adornment of the martyrs of Christ.

Having surpassed all carnal love with the love of thy Bridegroom, thou wast steadfastly patient when thou wast painfully beaten, crying aloud: “The infliction of tortures shall not separate me from Thy love, O Christ!”

Who can describe the courage of Bassa and the chaste Agrippina, who suffered in their desire for blessed union with the Trinity? Through them was the might of the idols mightily shown to be feeble.

*Theotokion:* The Virgin Queen, adorned with golden vesture, now standeth before the King, her Son, indisputably surpassing the angels, who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

The never-waning light which dwelt within thy body revealed thee to those who looked upon thee, emitting the radiance of miracles night and day.

Following the steps of the Shepherd, the unblemished ewe-lamb divinely offered herself unto Him as an immaculate sacrifice.

Possessed of a splendid intelligence and full of prophecy, O glorious Bassa, in the present thou wast vouchsafed to speak of the things of the future.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the affliction of my soul, O Mother of God who gavest birth to the all-good Word Who blesseth all.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Receiving the body of the holy martyr like a never-setting sun shining forth from Rome, Sicily is delivered from the grievous darkness of the demons.

The thrice-rich holy martyrs, who in the expectation of martyrdom died before death, valiantly bore thy life-bearing dead body away.

The weaponry of the enemy was of no effect against thee, for with the labor of thy glorious struggles, O Agrippina, thou didst cast down his pride like a city which hath no foundation.

A woman with an issue of blood was healed by touching thy body, and lepers who approached thee with faith were cleansed; and every other ailment fleeth when thy holy name is invoked, O martyr.

*Theotokion:* Now accepting the words of Gabriel, O most immaculate Virgin, we cry aloud: O only blessed Mother, O portal of the Sun of righteousness, Rejoice!

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…” —

The radiant day of thy splendid struggles hath dawned, whereon the divine Church, honoring them, doth call all together to cry out to thee with gladness: Rejoice, O virgin and martyr, most honored Agrippina!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Like a golden dove protected by the sword of the Cross, thou didst destroy the Moslems who drew nigh unto thy city at night, and thus didst save the faithful from a vile death at their hands, O martyr.

Enduring multifarious tortures for the sake of Christ, O martyr, therein thou didst find bliss devoid of pain and death, crying: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The wondrous priest, beholding thy wonders resplendent with miracles, magnified God, O Agrippina, and chanted in gladness: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Bearing thy body up firmly against the passions with steadfast intent, O virgin, thou didst never experience womanly weakness, crying out to the Master: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou remainest a virgin even after giving birth, O thou who gavest birth unto God, and as a mother didst nourish Him Who sustaineth the world, O all-immaculate one. To Him do we cry, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Night was seen to be like day by those who bore thy relics, O martyr. The place which received thee wast filled with all manner of sweet fragrance. The hordes of the demons were driven far away. And drops of healing are poured forth upon those who exalt Christ supremely for all ages.

Desiring the immortal Bridegroom, thou didst follow in His sweet footsteps, emulating His sufferings and death, O glorious martyr, and crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Possessed of unwavering faith, and feeding thy lamp with thy blood as with oil, O martyr, thou didst enter into the bridal-chamber, chanting hymns of heavenly joy: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Desiring to behold the beauty of the Lord and to visit His temple, ascending on the chariot of thy blood thou didst come to Him, chanting: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* The bush, which of old prefigured the strange mystery of thy birthgiving, remained unburnt, O all-immaculate one; for thou gavest birth to the Fire of the Godhead, yet remained unconsumed, O Maiden. Wherefore, we hymn thee for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

At the behest of Him Who createth all things, Agathonica, Bassa and Paula eagerly made haste to the goal of martyrdom, and as a company they have truly attained their uttermost desire.

Dwelling in the mansions of heaven, O virgin, gazing upon the beauties of things invisible, and receiving the effulgence of God, illumine those who hymn thee.

A wreath of grace hath been placed upon thy brow, O Agrippina, for thou didst finish the race and keep the faith intact, and the ranks of the righteous have received thee in beauty.

As thou standest with boldness before the Creator and Master, O martyr Agrippina, with all the saints from ages past ask thou forgiveness of offenses for those who hymn thee, O good virgin.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mary, who as a mother didst bear in thine arms Him Who sustaineth all things: Deliver me from the hands of the adversary, that, saved, I may praise thy mighty works.

