The 27th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Sampson the Hospitable

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs…” —

Having made thine abode in the wilderness like Elijah of old, O all-praised father Sampson, with the burnings of asceticism thou didst cause the assaults of the flesh to wither up, purifying thy mind with unceasing prostrations before God. Pray thou now, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

O divinely wise father Sampson, adorned with dispassion thou wast numbered among the desert-dwellers, and didst make thine abode in a monastery of the venerable, where was the never-waning light, and where also was the tree of life. Pray thou now, that God grant to our souls peace and great mercy.

O divinely inspired father Sampson, thou wast a lamp enlightening all the earth with the beams of thy miracles, dispelling the darkness of soul-destroying infirmities and driving away the gloom of the demons. Pray thou now, that God grant to our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

Woe is me! What shall I do, having defiled with transgressions my mind, soul and body? What shall I do? How shall I escape the unbearable flame, the unbreakable and everlasting bonds? But before the end, O most immaculate one, entreat thy Son, that He grant me remission!

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody —

When the unblemished Ewe-lamb and Mistress saw her Lamb on the Cross, bereft of form and comeliness, she said, lamenting: “Woe is me! Whither hath Thy beauty set, O Thou Who art most sweet? Where is Thy majesty, where the shining grace of Thy visage, O my Son most beloved?”

Troparion, in Tone VIII —

In thy patience, O venerable father, thou didst acquire thy reward, having endured in prayer without ceasing, and loved the poor and provided for them. Beseech Christ God, O merciful and blessed Sampson, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “With faith I hymn thee, O Sampson, with divine words”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Standing crowned before the throne of the Master, O all-blessed one, send light down upon me who strive to praise with hymns thy most splendid triumph.

Desiring the one thing which leadeth thee to life, thou didst pass beyond the beauties of this world and didst acquire a transcendent inheritance. Wherefore, assembling, we honor thee, O Sampson.

When thou didst submit to the law of God, rejoicing, O right wondrous one, thou didst attain the summit of virtue, being merciful to all. Wherefore, we now call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one, without ceasing we bless and glorify thee as the mighty help of all the defeated, who in manner past recounting gavest birth unto God.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Let us praise the sacred Sampson; for, emulating the compassion of God, he was merciful to the needy, providing vesture to all the naked.

Having led the godly life in a holy and pious manner, thou hast been numbered among the saints and hast attained unto the mansions of the venerable, counted worthy of ineffable illumination.

Blessed art thou, and well will it be with thee, who didst keep the divine laws of our Lord and God, O father. Him do thou beseech, that thy flock be saved.

*Theotokion:* Drive away the darkness of my mind and soul, O pure one, and grant that I may live to see the promised day, observing the precepts of salvation.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly…” —

Shining forth in spirit like a brilliant beacon, O most blessed Sampson, thou dost illumine us with honor in thy habitation; thus, O father, thou dost dispense the healing given thee by God to those with divers ailments. Wherefore, by thine entreaties deliver us from the passions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, thou hast made new our mortal nature which had grown corrupt in earthly passions, and hast raised all up from death to a life of incorruption. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed, as is meet, O all-glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.

Stavrotheotokion —

O all-immaculate Mother of Christ God, a sword pierced thine all-holy soul, when thou didst see thy Son and God crucified of His own will. Him do thou entreat without ceasing, O blessed one, that He grant us the forgiveness of our transgressions.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Like a star thou dost illumine the hearts of all of us who rightly call thee blessed.

Shaking slumber from thine eyes, thou didst keep vigil constantly and didst lull to sleep the pleasures of the body.

Thou wast generous to the poor for the sake of Christ, and, rejoicing, hast received a heavenly inheritance, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* We hymn and bless thee, O Mistress, as the splendid palace of the Word.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

The all-pure Light which abode within thee, O father, made thee wholly luminous, enlightening the faithful with the splendid effulgence of thy virtues.

By thy mercy thou wast wealth for the poor and didst manifestly rise up as a physician for those in sickness, removing their ailments with healing.

Thou didst show thyself truly to be a pure temple of the all-holy and honored Spirit, cleansing away the filth of the passions, O God-bearing father; wherefore, we praise thee.

*Theotokion:* With faith and godly voices do we hymn thee, O all-holy and pure one, as the beauty of Jacob, who gavest birth for us to God in the flesh, before Whom all things tremble.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Loving almsgiving, O glorious Sampson, thou wast enriched with heavenly treasures, opening thy compassion unto the poor with perfect intent.

Thou didst erect a sacred building to the glory of our God; and, hastening thereto, the faithful are cleansed of their many ailments, O all-blessed one.

Thou didst live thy life purely, and hast made thine abode with the venerable in holiness. Pray for us who honor thee with faith, O divinely inspired one.

*Theotokion:* By divine grace wast thou the pure palace, the splendid chamber and the lofty heaven of God the King of all, O most immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As firstfruits…” —

Rejoicing with psalms and hymns, O divinely wise and venerable Sampson, and hastening to thy divine shrine, as to that of an excellent physician and a right acceptable intercessor, we glorify Christ Who bestoweth upon thee such grace of healing.

*Ikos:* Let us praise the venerable Sampson, who blamelessly completed a meek and guileless life at an advanced age, and who gloriously received the sure and ineffable grace of miracles: the feeder of the hungry, the helper of those in need, and the great champion who raised up a divine temple of healing for the infirm.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Possessed of the mighty strength of Christ amid dangers, O all-blessed and venerable one, thou didst pass through the tempest of life without capsizing and didst reach a calm haven, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Moved by great wisdom and spiritual love, thou didst erect a great building, O father; and ever having recourse thereto, all receive healing, crying aloud and saying: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou wast shown to be a brilliant beacon of the virtues, radiant with divine light, O Sampson, and hast enlightened the ends of the whole world. Wherefore, assembling, with faith we call thee blessed, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* The fleece once prefigured thy pure womb, which received the heavenly Rain which bedeweth all who are held fast by the thirst of sin, O most lauded one. Blessed art thou who gavest birth unto God in the flesh!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Moving thy tongue to the hymns of God, O father Sampson, thou didst enslave the passions of the flesh to thy soul by abstinence and didst show thyself to be a true servant of Christ and a heir to the heavenly city.

Thy pure mind, adorned with divine splendors, was shown to be all-luminous and the abode of pure and divine effulgence, O most blessed one; wherefore, we honor thee, O Sampson, forever.

Possessed of a sanctified life, O most blessed Sampson, thou wast manifestly and all-gloriously glorified, passing over to God; for, lo! thy memory and righteousness abide forever.

*Theotokion:* Still the cruel tempest of my passions, O pure and blessed Virgin, and do battle against all the incorporeal enemies who pitilessly assail my lowliness, that I may hymn thee with faith.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Behold, thy memory hath shone forth upon all like the sun, O father, illumining with radiance those who glorify thee thereon as a minister of Christ, an heir of His kingdom and a companion of all the venerable.

In that thy life is luminous, thy glory is great and the tomb where thine honored body lay is rich, O wise one, it poureth forth health upon those who have recourse to it with faith and ever ask thy help.

Cease thou never to visit us with the all-glorious healing which thou didst acquire by thy pangs, O father, but intercede for us unceasingly in thy great loving-kindness, and ease the pain and labor of our souls, we pray.

Shining forth the rays of the sun upon those who honor thee, O blessed father, illumine the senses of our soul, and make us worthy partakers of the divine effulgence by thy supplications, we pray thee.

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee to be the luminous cloud of the Sun of righteousness, O pure one, we cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou glory of the apostles, crown of the glorious martyrs, and salvation of the faithful!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…” —

In God-pleasing manner thou didst give thy wealth away to the poor and didst offer thyself wholly to the Lord, O Sampson. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us from all the passions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

By thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all thy servants unharmed by the assaults of the enemy; for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge in time of need.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto God for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, § 213

\[Gal. 5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly rejoice.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 67

\[Lk. 12: 32-40\]

The Lord said: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell what ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye yourselves like unto men who wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants. And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

