The 29th Day of the Month of June

Commemoration of Holy, Glorious, All-praised & Preëminent Apostles Peter & Paul

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Thine honored apostles hast Thou given to Thy Church as a boast, O Lord, and therein shine forth the noetic luminaries Peter and Paul, as stars of the Word, shedding light upon the whole world. By them hast Thou enlightened the darkness of the West, O Almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls. Twice

Thou hast granted confirmation unto Thy Church, O Lord: the steadfastness of Peter, the understanding and splendid wisdom of Paul, and the truly divine proclamation of them both, which dispelleth the deception of the Greeks. Wherefore, having been initiated into the mysteries by them both, we hymn Thee, O Almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

Thou hast provided the sinful with a model of repentance: Thy two apostles. For the one denied Thee at the time of Thy suffering, yet repented, while the other opposed the preaching of Thee, but later came to believe. And both are preëminent among the assembly of their peers, O Almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII—

Thou didst vex and persecute the Church, O most blessed Paul, but when thou wast called from heaven, thou didst defend it most gloriously. Pray thou now, that it be delivered from misfortunes, and that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Thy protection is spiritual healing, O Virgin Theotokos, for fleeing thereto we are delivered from the ailments of our souls.

Prokimenon of the day.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the tree…”—

O Peter, foundation of the apostles, rock of the Church of Christ, prince of Christians: Gloriously tend the sheep of thy fold, protect thy lambs from the wolves of falsehood, deliver thy flock from grievous perils; for thee have we truly acquired as a never-tiring advocate before God, and, boasting in thee, we are all saved.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

O Paul, fisher of the nations, intercessor for Christians, beacon for the whole world, ever-speaking mouth of Christ the living God, who in preaching the divine Faith hast passed over all the ends of the earth like the sun: From the bonds of sin release all who praise thee and are adorned by thy supplications.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

O Peter, preëminent disciple! O Paul, who completed the rank of the apostles! O foremost preachers, earnestly pray ye now to God with boldness, and send down speedy help and release from misfortunes upon us who are sorrowful, that we may boast in faith, by deeds revealing your protection now in your tabernacle.

Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV—

Having chosen thee as the first, O Peter foundation of the Faith, Christ crowned thee, as He, the Master of all, foretold unto thee, saying: “Blessed art thou, O Simon bar Jonah, for flesh and blood hath not disclosed and made thee My sacred herald, but my Father Who is in the heavens!” Him do thou beseech, O divinely blessed apostle, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Deliver us from our needs, O Mother of Christ God, who gavest birth unto the Creator of all, that we all may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou that alone art the intercession for our souls!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O first-enthroned among the apostles and teachers of the whole world: Entreat the Master of all, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, the composition of Andrew Pyrrhus, in Tone II—

*Automelon:* With what wreaths of praise shall we crown Peter and Paul, who were separate in body yet united in spirit, the foremost of the preachers of God, the one as leader of the apostles, and the other as the one who labored more than the rest? For Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, doth truly crown them with diadems of glory as is meet. *Thrice*

*Prosomia:* With what beauties of song shall we hymn Peter and Paul? They are the wings of divine knowledge who soared above the ends of the earth and were upborne to the heavens, the hands of the grace of the Gospel, the rivers of wisdom, the arms of the Cross, wherewith Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down the pride of the demons. *Thrice*

With what spiritual hymns shall we praise Peter and Paul? They have closed the ever-gaping mouths of the ungodly, they are the dreadful swords of the Spirit, the splendid adornments of Rome, the nurturers of the whole world, the noetic and divinely graven tablets of the new covenant, whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, proclaimed in Sion. *Twice*

Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV—

By His thrice-repeated question, “Peter, lovest thou Me?”, did Christ set aright the three denials. Wherefore, Simon said to the Author of mysteries: “Lord, Thou knowest all things, Thou understandest all things! Thou knowest that I love Thee!” Wherefore, the Savior said unto him: “Feed My lambs; feed My chosen ones; feed My sheep, which I have ransomed for salvation by My blood!” Him do thou beseech, O divinely blessed apostle, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

The Prophet David, the forefather of God, for thy sake gaveth voice beforehand in psalmody concerning thee, unto Him Who in thee accomplished mighty works: the Queen stood at Thy right hand. For God Whose good pleasure it was to become incarnate of thee without father showed thee, His Mother, to be the mediatress of life, that He might renew His image which had become corrupt through the passions; and having found the sheep which had strayed among the mountains and become lost, He taketh it upon His shoulders and bringeth it to His Father; and Christ, Who is possessed of great and rich mercy, in accordance with His will, uniteth it with the hosts of heaven, and saveth the world, O Theotokos.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Brethren, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who according to His abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Whom having not seen, ye love; in Whom, though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Beloved, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance: but as He Who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy. And if ye call on the Father, Who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear: Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.

A Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme; or unto governors, as unto those who are sent by Him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of those who do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king. Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow His steps: Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth: Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself to Him Who judgeth righteously: Who His own self bore our sins in His own body on the Tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness.

At Litia, these stichera, idiomela, in Tone II—

The composition of Andrew of Jerusalem: Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and with fitting praises let us crown today Peter and Paul, the right laudable and beautiful company, the chosen artisans of grace, for they have abundantly sown the word for all. Therewith they have made rich the grace of the Spirit, and as branches of the true Vine they have put forth for us a ripe cluster which doth gladden our hearts. To them do we cry aloud with guileless countenance and a pure conscience, saying: Rejoice, destroyers of the irrational and servants of those endowed with reason! Rejoice, ye beauteous chosen ones of the Creator and Fashioner of all! Rejoice, mediators of good things and dispellers of that which is false! Let us beseech them, that they ever entreat the Creator and Teacher to grant sure peace unto the world and great mercy to our souls.

*The composition of Arsenius:* Let us praise the preëminent Peter and Paul as intercessors for the whole world: the disciples of Christ and foundations of the Church, the pillars and ramparts of truth, the divine clarions of the teachings and sufferings of Christ. For having travelled the breadth of the whole world, sowing the Faith as with a plough, they planted divine knowledge for all, revealing the word of the Trinity. O Peter, thou rock and foundation! O Paul, thou chosen vessel! Yoked together by the bonds of Christ, they have drawn all to the knowledge of God. Gentiles and Jews, cities and islands, they have led to Christ; and they pray that our souls be saved.

*The composition of Germanus:* O Peter, preëminent among the glorious apostles, rock of faith! O wondrous Paul, rhetor and luminary of the Holy Churches! Standing before the divine throne, pray ye to Christ for us.

O blessed Paul, mouth of the Lord, foundation of doctrines, who wast once a persecutor of Jesus the Savior, thou art now among the foremost enthroned among the apostles. Wherefore, thou hast seen ineffable things, O wise one, ascending even unto the third heaven, and didst cry aloud: Come with me, and we shall not be deprived of good things!

*The composition of John the Monk, in Tone III:* The citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, the rock of faith, the rhetor of the Church of Christ, the two servants of the Trinity, the fishers of the world: Having forsaken that which is here on earth and departed unto God with suffering, beseech Him with boldness that our souls be saved.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone V—

As the Wisdom of God, the consubstantial Word of the Father foretold in the Gospels, O most lauded apostles, ye are exceeding fruitful vines bearing the ripe and comely Cluster upon your branches, and we the faithful, eating thereof, delight in its taste with gladness. O Peter, rock of faith, and Paul, boast of the whole world, make steadfast the flock which ye acquired by your teachings.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, thou unassailable city, impregnable rampart, steadfast intercession and refuge of our souls.

At the aposticha, these stichera idiomela, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone I—

Who can relate the bonds and tribulations thou didst endure in all cities, O glorious Apostle Paul, the labors, pangs and vigils, the oppression amid hunger and thirst, in winter-time and nakedness, the basket \[in which thou madest thine escape\], thy beating with staves and stones, thy journeys, and the time thou wast cast into the deep? Thou wast a spectacle for angels and men. Wherefore, thou didst endure all things for the sake of Christ Who strengthened thee, that thou mightest acquire the world for Jesus Christ thy Lord. Wherefore, we who honor thy memory with faith beseech thee: Pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Who can tell of thine imprisonment and tribulations throughout all the cities, O glorious apostle? Or who can imagine the struggles and exertions wherewith thou didst labor to spread the glad tidings of Christ, that thou mightest obtain all and lead the Church to Christ? Yet pray thou that it preserve thy goodly confession even unto its final breath, O Paul, apostle and teacher of the Church.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let us praise Peter and Paul, the luminaries of the Great Church, for they have shone forth in the firmament of the Faith more brightly than the sun, and with the rays of their preaching have led the nations up from ignorance. For the one, crucified upon a cross, made his journey to heaven, where he hath received from Christ the keys of the kingdom; and the other, beheaded by the sword, passed over to the Savior. Both are fittingly blessed, and both make proclamation unto Israel, who unjustly lifted up their hands against the Lord Himself. Wherefore, through their supplications, O Christ our God, cast down those who rage against us, and make steadfast the Orthodox Faith, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Glory…, the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone VI—

A joyous feast hath shone forth today upon the ends of the earth: the most honored commemoration of the all-wise and preëminent Apostles Peter and Paul. Wherefore, Rome, joining chorus, rejoiceth in hymns and songs; and we celebrate, O brethren, observing this most honored day, crying: Rejoice, O Apostle Peter, thou true friend of thy Teacher, Jesus Christ our God! Rejoice, O most beloved Paul, thou preacher of the Faith and teacher of the whole world! As ye have boldness, O ye two holy and chosen ones, entreat Christ our God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: theotokion, in the same tone—

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the apostles, in Tone IV—

O first-enthroned among the apostles and teachers of the whole world: Entreat the Master of all, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the apostles, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion in the same tone.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sedalion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Forsaking the fishing of the deep, having received from the heavenly Father the divine revelation of the incarnation of the Son, with boldness thou didst cry out with faith to thy Creator: “I know that Thou art the consubstantial Son of God!” Wherefore, as is meet, thou wast truly shown to be a rock of faith and the key-bearer of grace. O Apostle Peter, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…: Another sedalion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone was sealed…”—

O ye faithful, as is meet, let us praise the most lauded Peter, the ally of Paul, the net of the world, the rock of the Church, in that he holdeth the keys of heaven: for the whole world hath been enlightened by them with the Faith of the Trinity. Glory to Him Who hath glorified you! Glory to Him Who hath strengthened you! Glory to Him Who because of you hath given us everlasting life!

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Stretching forth thy hands, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator Who in His goodness became incarnate, O all-holy Virgin, beseech Him to deliver from temptations, passions and misfortunes us who praise thee with love and cry aloud: Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who issued forth from thee! Glory to Him Who by thy birthgiving hath delivered us!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sedalion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Receiving from Christ a heavenly calling, thou wast shown to be a proclaimer of the light, and didst illumine all with the teachings of grace; for having cast off the worship of the letter of the law, thou didst make plain to the faithful the understanding of the Spirit. Wherefore, thou wast caught up on high to the third heaven as is meet, and hast attained unto paradise. O Apostle Paul, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

With luminous radiance ye enlighten the ends of the earth like stars with the doctrines of holy preaching, O apostles of the Lord, initiates of the mysteries of heaven.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We, the faithful, bless the Theotokos, through whom we have been delivered from corruption: the fervent ally of those in tribulation, our helper and reconciliation with God.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify you, O apostles of Christ, who enlightened the whole world with your teachings, and led all the ends of the earth unto Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sedalion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Let us praise Peter and the all-wise Paul, who were shown to be preëminent among the disciples, the great and radiant luminaries; for shining forth with the fire of the divine Spirit, they burned away all the gloom of deception. Wherefore, they have fittingly been shown to be warriors of the kingdom on high, equally enthroned in grace. For this cause we cry aloud: O apostles of Christ God, ask remission of transgressions for those who with love celebrate your holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer, who knewest not wedlock, as the vessel of the Comforter, O all-hymned one, haste thou to deliver me, who am the vile abode of iniquity and have become in mind the plaything of the demons, from their machinations; and make me the splendid habitation of the virtues. O radiant and incorrupt one, dispel from me the cloud of the passions, and vouchsafe unto me communion on high and the never-waning light, through thy supplications.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 67

\[Jn. 21: 15-23\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me more than these?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He saith unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time: “Lovest thou Me?” And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He said unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, which is he that betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, “He shall not die”; but, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron idiomelon, in Tone VI—

With hymns of praise let us honor the true preachers of piety, the all-radiant stars of the Church: Peter, the rock of Faith, and Paul, the teacher of the Truth and initiate of the mysteries of Christ. For both of them, having sown the word of truth in the hearts of the faithful, beseech Christ God Who giveth fruitfulness unto all, that our souls be saved.

Two canons, the composition of John of Damascus: the first to the holy Peter, the irmos of which is chanted twice, followed by 6 troparia; and the second for the holy Paul, with 6 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the holy Apostle Peter, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* There is none like unto Thee, O all-glorious Lord; for with Thy mighty hand Thou didst deliver the people whom Thou hadst acquired, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

With divinely inspired songs let us hymn today the preëminent of the apostles as the first called of Christ.

Having foreknown thee, O most blessed Peter, the Preëternal One ordained thee from of old as the leader of His Church, the first-enthroned.

Neither flesh nor blood, but the Father inspired thee to theologize Christ as the true Son of God Most High, O apostle.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, the holy mountain, the most exalted chariot, the Mother of God and true Virgin.

Canon of the holy Apostle Paul,

in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

When Christ called things into being out of non-existence, O most blessed Paul, He chose thee from thy mother’s womb to carry before the nations His divine name, which is above every name; for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Declaring to thee the imminent outpouring of piety and the cleansing away of falsehood, O Paul, Christ, Who showed Himself to be as bright as lightning on the mountain, dimmed thy bodily eyes while enlightening the eyes of thy soul with the understanding of the Trinity: for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Performing circumcision on the eighth day, as a zealot of the traditions of thy fathers, O Paul, and showing thyself to be a law-bound pharisee, a Jew by birth, of the tribe of Benjamin, thou didst come to consider all such things as but dung, and didst acquire Christ: for gloriously hath He been glorified.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, pure Mother of almighty God, who sprang forth from royal stock and gavest birth in the flesh, in manner transcending nature, to God Who alone reigneth over all: Save me from misfortunes, who chant unto thy Son: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

The sweet mouth of Christ God showed thee to be blessed and a sure treasure of the kingdom; wherefore, we hymn thee, O Apostle Peter.

On the rock of thy theology hath Jesus the Master established the Church unshakably, and therein we glorify thee, O Apostle Peter.

How greater than the angels was Peter in the body! For Christ God said that at His radiant coming he would be a judge and would be equally enthroned.

*Theotokion:* O thou who knewest not wedlock, who gavest birth unto God in the flesh: Render me steadfast and unshaken by the assaults of the passions, for we have none other helper than thee, O pure one.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou hast been set as a precious foundation stone for the souls of the faithful, a corner-stone of the Savior and Lord.

O most blessed Paul, pray thou that on thy foundations the splendors of most laudable virtues may be set firmly.

Ever perfectly bearing the mortality of Jesus on thy body, O Paul, thou wast vouchsafed true life.

*Theotokion:* Thee have we all of us Christians acquired as our rampart and refuge, and glorify thee without ceasing, O thou who knewest not wedlock.

Hypacoï, in Tone VIII—

What dungeon held thee not prisoner? What Church had thee not as an orator? Damascus extolleth thee, O Paul, for it knew thee blinded by the light; and Rome, which received thy blood, boasteth in thee; but Tarsus rejoiceth yet more and loveth thee, honoring thine infancy. O Peter, rock of the Faith, and Paul, boast of the whole world, coming together from Rome make us steadfast.

Ode IV

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* This is our God, Who became incarnate of the Virgin and hath deified our nature! And, hymning Him, we cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

As He promised, Christ made thee a divine fisher of men for His Church, entrusting its helm to thee first.

Entreated by thee, O Peter, may Jesus, the Bestower of life, Who gaveth thee the authority to bind and to loose, be merciful unto me.

Pray thou earnestly, O Peter, that the kingdom of Christ be opened unto those who honor thy divine memory with unwavering faith.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Lady Theotokos, having cleansed away mine evil thoughts by thy supplications, show me forth as fruitful, O Mother of the God of all.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* Thou didst mount Thy steeds, Thine apostles, O Lord, and didst take their bridles in Thy hands; and Thy chariot hath become salvation for those who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Once Saul crouched like a lion, wrathfully destroying the Church of Christ; but he was seized by the divine voice of the Lamb of God, Whom he had persecuted, and Who entrusted His flock to him as shepherd.

He who would enlighten the whole world was struck blind; but Ananias was sent to him, imparting unto him enlightenment of soul and body through divine revelation, and showing him to be a chosen vessel.

As is meet, Damascus is given drink by Paul; for from him, as from the garden of paradise, a great well-spring of divine waters once issued forth and irrigated the whole earth abundantly with knowledge divine.

*Theotokion:* The Lord hath cast down the mighty from their thrones, as the Virgin Mother said, and with divine good things hath filled the hungry, who cry aloud with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* O Lord Who acquired us, the chosen people, by Thy Blood, grant us Thy peace, preserving Thy flock in oneness of mind.

He Who through love received boldness before God hath fittingly become wondrous, though he was an ignorant fisherman, and he now worketh all-glorious wonders through grace.

Thy godly apostle, O Christ, having acquired neither gold nor silver for Thy sake, but rather virtue, hath been enriched by the power of miracles.

By thine effective word the feet and joints of the lame were set aright, for all-glorious things were accomplished by the divine Spirit.

*Theotokion:* God became incarnate, O pure one, hypostatically united to the flesh He received from thee, yet remaining immutable, incorporeal in His divine nature.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst choose true praise, O Apostle Paul, ever bearing the Cross of Christ the King as a trophy.

For thee to live is Christ, and to die is an excellent acquisition; for through love thou wast crucified with Him Who was crucified for our sake, O all-glorious Paul.

Thou truly rejoicest in the Lord, O honorable Paul, having departed from the body and passed over to Christ God, the Bestower of life.

*Theotokion:* Ever beseech thy Son and our God, O pure Mary who knewest not wedlock, that He send forth His mercy upon us, the faithful.

Ode VI

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* Jonah, who was three days in the sea monster, prefigured Thee, the Immortal One, O Christ, for Thou didst die of Thine own will and wast three days in the heart of the earth.

As of old with Thy right hand Thou didst save Peter who walked on foot upon the waters, O Christ, so do Thou save me, who am drowning amid the storm of cruel perils, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness.

Thou didst forsake things which were not essential, O Peter, and didst attain unto those things which are essential; and as a certain merchant thou didst manifestly search for Christ: the Pearl beyond price.

O Peter, thou didst slay those who mindlessly strove to tempt the all-holy Spirit, Whom before thou hadst theologized, openly confessing Him as God, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth for us to the incarnate Word of God Who transcendeth all nature; wherefore, with lips and soul we profess thee to be the Theotokos.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Spurning all the beautiful things of the world, thou wast wounded by the love of the Master and by desire for the common salvation of man, wishing to bear witness unto Him, O blessed Paul. Pray thou now in behalf of the whole world.

As an excellent emulator of the Master, clothed in Him, O Paul, thou wast truly all things to all men, that thou mightest acquire and save all the people; and pursuing the ends of the world for Christ, thou didst truly save them.

As is meet Christ hath given thee life in the heavens, O Apostle Paul; for thou didst not desire a city which abideth here, O blessed one, but wast a faithful minister and celebrant of His mysteries.

*Theotokion:* The Lord looked down upon thee, restoring my nature, in that He is mighty; and doing mighty works, O most immaculate one, through thee my God hath saved me from corruption, in that He is full of loving-kindness.

Kontakion, in Tone II—

The steadfast and divinely eloquent preachers, the foremost of Thine apostles, O Lord, hast Thou received into the delight of Thy good things and into rest; for Thou hast accepted their pangs and death as greater than any wholeburnt offering, O Thou Who alone knowest the hearts of men.

*Ikos:* Fill my tongue with light, O my Savior, and having expanded my mouth and filled it, have pity on my heart, that I may speak, follow, and teach that which I first do: for Thou didst say that he who doeth and teacheth is great. For if I speak only, and do not act, I am accounted as sounding brass. Wherefore, grant that I may speak fitting things and do that which is profitable, O Thou Who alone knowest the hearts of men.

Ode VII

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* O unoriginate Word, only-begotten Son, Who existed in the beginning with the Father and the Spirit: blessed and supremely exalted art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Chastised by the divine providence of Christ, thou wast permitted to emulate the Merciful One, O Peter, that thy distress over denying Him before His suffering might be assuaged.

Having risen from the dead, Christ appeared to thee, the first-called and exceeding beloved, as the right glorious one who was first to preside over the apostles.

The Master, healing thy threefold denial before His suffering, O Peter, confirmed His love by a threefold divinely uttered question.

Thou didst call the all-seeing God the Word as witness to thy love for Christ, O Peter; wherefore, He entrusted the beloved flock to thee.

*Theotokion:* We all bless thee as the Mother of the God of all, who conceived in the flesh of thy womb the preëternal Word Who shone forth from God the Father.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* On the plain of Dura the tyrant once built a furnace to torment the God-bearers; and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, and sang, all three together, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

He who in latter times was called and surpassed all others in zeal became the seal and crown of Thine apostles, O Christ. With him the people of the Church chant unto thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Even though Paul the prisoner first persecuted Thy Church, O Christ, yet did he later replace his former ferocity with zeal for Thee; and he hath gathered together the nations, who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having from Jerusalem preached the Gospel unto all, thou didst take it round about the whole world, O Paul, and, teaching even unto the far ends of Illyricum, thou didst cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Caught up in awe, thou didst attain unto the third heaven, O thou who art all-rich; and hearing ineffable words, thou didst cry aloud: Glory to the transcendent Father and the Son, and to the equally-enthroned effulgence of the Spirit of God Who trieth the depths!

*Theotokion:* Like rain upon the fleece did Christ God descend upon thee, O Virgin, and He issued forth from thee in the flesh, uniting those things that before were separate, and granting peace on earth and in heaven. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* O Christ Who bearest all things by Thine unapproachable power, Thou didst bedew Thy venerable children who cried out amid the flame: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

“They shall stretch forth thine arms and bind thee to a cross,” the Master foretold, commanding thee to follow Him; and thou criest aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Working wonders, by the word of grace thou didst heal Æneus who was grievously paralyzed, and didst raise up Tabitha from the dead; and they cried: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

O Christ Who announced unto Peter that the nations were cleansed, by spiritual radiance purify my thoughts, for I cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O most holy Virgin who gavest birth to God the Word in the flesh, driving the darkness away from my soul by thy supplications, illumine me who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Paul was bound to thee by Thy love and underwent a goodly change; for the glorious one lived not for himself, O Compassionate One, but had Thee living within him forever.

Thou didst betroth the Church unto Christ, presenting it to Him as a bride; for thou wast shown to be its wedding-escort, O God-bearing Paul. Wherefore, it glorifieth thee for all ages.

Thou didst fight the good fight, and finishing thy race lawfully, thou didst preserve the treasure of the Faith. Wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed crowns of righteousness, O Paul.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, O Virgin, unwedded Bride! Rejoice, cloud who shone forth the Sun of righteousness, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Holy Apostle Peter

*Irmos:* Thee, the all-glorious Bride and most holy Theotokos, who gavest birth to the Creator of all things, visible and invisible, do we magnify with hymns.

Thine excellent grace is rightly glorified, for thy very shadow dispelleth the sufferings of the sick, O Peter; wherefore, we magnify thee.

Blessed is Peter, who with ineffable divine power cast down Simon Magus, who through sorcery had soared aloft into the air.

By thy supplications grant remission of offenses, enlightenment of heart and gladness of spirit unto those who hymn thy memory, O apostle.

O Peter, all thy words, relics and dust are full of glory, sanctity and miracles for those who with faith bow down with love before thy divine chains.

*Theotokion:* The Fruit of thy womb caused the heavenly chorister, who announced “Rejoice!” with a loud voice unto thee who gavest birth to joy, to hymn thy name.

Canon of the Holy Apostle Paul

*Irmos:* Thou didst transcend the laws of nature, conceiving the Creator and Lord, and didst become a portal of salvation for the world. Wherefore, we magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

We bow down before thy chains, which thou didst bear for Christ like a malefactor, O Paul, and we kiss the wounds which thou didst bear on thy glorious and victorious body.

Now thou hast departed unto Him Whom thou didst unceasingly desire, O apostle; and dwelling with him as a servant, with unceasing entreaties draw thou thy servants to thyself.

No longer is Christ visible to thee in shadows or in a reflection, but thou dost gaze upon Him face to face, and He perfectly revealeth to thee the understanding of the Godhead.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Mother of God, thou wast the boast of the apostles of Christ, the glory of the martyrs and the foundation of the prophets; wherefore, we all magnify thee as is meet.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Let us all hymn the foremost among the apostles, the godly Peter and Paul, the universal luminaries, the preachers of the Faith, the divinely sounded clarions, the speakers of dogmas, the pillars of the Church and destroyers of falsehood. Twice

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O divinely joyous Maiden, Mother of God and Virgin, great and all-glorious is the mystery of thy birthgiving, did the prophets proclaim, the apostles teach and the martyrs confess; the angels hymn it, and men bow down before it.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

When the Savior questioned the twelve disciples and apostles, asking: “Whom do men say that I am?”, Peter, the foremost of the apostles, receiving grace from heaven, answered, theologizing, crying out clearly: “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God!” Wherefore, he is fittingly blessed as one who received revelation from on high, rightly receiving the authority to loose and to bind.

When Christ, the Word of God Who revealed Himself through the Father, asked “Whom do ye suppose that I am?”, then, speaking unto all with divine eloquence, thou didst straightway cry out: “Thou art the Son of the living God!” Wherefore, thou didst receive as thy reward the Savior’s words: “Blessed art thou, Simon, son of Jonah!” For God doth glorify those who glorify Him and calleth them to rich delight; and He set thee as the rock unashamed, the foundation and ground of the Church.

Called from on high, and not by men, when earthly darkness covered thy bodily eyes, putting an end to thine ungodly plans, a heavenly light illumined thy noetic eyes, disclosing the beauty of piety. Wherefore, thou didst recognize Christ our God Who brought forth light out of darkness. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.

As a preacher of Christ bearing the boast of the Cross, more than others thou didst discern the most ardent divine love which bindeth to the Desired One those who gaze upon it. Wherefore, thou didst call thyself a prisoner of Christ, who desired the burden of perils as something sweeter than any food, and who lived for thy Master. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone VI—

The most honored feast of the apostles hath arrived for the Church of Christ, bringing salvation unto us all. Wherefore, mystically plaiting hymns for them, let us say: Rejoice, O lamps unto those who are in darkness, shedding forth rays of the noetic Sun! Rejoice, O Peter and Paul, ye unshakable foundations of the divine doctrines, friends of Christ, precious vessels! Come ye into our midst, vouchsafing immaterial gifts unto those who praise your feast with hymns.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. With the holy apostles entreat Him, we pray thee, O Mistress, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the Apostle Peter, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Apostle Paul.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 193

\[II Cor. 11: 21-30\]

Brethren: Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, \(I speak foolishly,\) I am bold also. Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I. Are they ministers of Christ? \(I speak as a fool\) I am more; in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Matthew, §67

\[16: 13-19\]

At that time, when Jesus came into the coasts of Cæsaria Philippi, He asked His disciples, saying: “Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?” And they said: “Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.” He said unto them: “But whom say ye that I am?” And Simon Peter answered and said: “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” And Jesus answered and said unto him: “Blessed art thou, Simon bar Jonah: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father Who is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

We read the daily Epistle and Gospel on the first convenient day before this feast.

If this feast fall on a Wednesday or a Friday, we are permitted to eat fish and to drink wine.

N.B.: If the feast of the apostles fall on a Sunday,

the hymns of the apostles take precedence over the hymns of the resurrection.

