The 30th Day of the MONTH OF JUNE

Synaxis of the Twelve Holy, Glorious & All-praised Apostles

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the Apostles Peter & Paul, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise…” —

With what wreaths of praise shall we crown Peter and Paul, who were separate in body yet united in spirit, the foremost of the preachers of God, the one as leader of the apostles, and the other as one who labored more than the rest? For Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, doth truly crown them with diadems of glory as is meet.

With what beauties of song shall we hymn Peter and Paul? They are the wings of divine knowledge who soared above the ends of the earth and were upborne to the heavens, the hands of the grace of the Gospel, the rivers of wisdom, the arms of the Cross, wherewith Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down the pride of the demons.

With what spiritual hymns shall we praise Peter and Paul? They have closed the ever-gaping mouths of the ungodly, they are the dreadful swords of the Spirit, the splendid adornments of Rome, the nurturers of the whole world, the noetic and divinely graven tablets of the new covenant, whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, proclaimed in Sion.

And 3 of the twelve apostles, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As witnesses and beholders of the incarnation of the Word, ye are blessed, O disciples most rich; for ye have appeared to the world, as bright as lightning, and pour forth the sweetness of the noetic mountain. As separate and ever-flowing rivers of paradise ye irrigate the Churches of the nations with divine waters.

Like rays shining with spiritual luster ye were sent throughout the whole world, abundantly showing forth the working of miracles, O ye who were servants of the mysteries of Christ, divine graven tablets of the law ordained by God, inscribed by the grace of God, O initiates of divine mysteries who are most rich.

The pen of the fishermen hath effaced the arrogance of the philosophers and the prating of the orators, while manifestly setting forth the glad tidings of the good mysteries, the divinely wise teachings of the dogmas, the partaking of eternal nourishment, the delight of the angels, and everlasting glory.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

The most honored feast of the apostles hath arrived for the Church of Christ, bringing salvation for us all. Wherefore, mystically plaiting hymns for them, let us say: Rejoice, O lamps unto those who are in darkness, emitting rays of the noetic Sun! Rejoice, O Peter and Paul, ye unshakable foundations of the divine doctrines, friends of Christ, precious vessels! Come ye into our midst, vouchsafing immaterial gifts unto those who praise your feast with hymns.

Now & ever…: dogmaticon, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnat

e, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Thine honored apostles hast Thou given to Thy Church as a boast, O Lord, and therein they shine forth the noetic luminaries Peter and Paul, as stars of the Word, illumining the whole world. By them hast Thou enlightened the darkness of the West, O Almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Thou hast granted confirmation unto Thy Church, O Lord: the steadfastness of Peter, the understanding and splendid wisdom of Paul, and the truly divine proclamation of them both, which dispelleth the deception of the Greeks. Wherefore, initiated into the mysteries by them both, we hymn Thee, O Almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Thou hast given to the sinful a model of repentance: Thy two apostles; for the one denied Thee at the time of Thy suffering, yet repented, while the other opposed the preaching of Thee, but later came to believe. And both are preëminent among the assembly of their peers, O Almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

A joyous feast hath shone forth today upon the ends of the earth: the most honored commemoration of the all-wise and preëminent apostles Peter and Paul. Wherefore, Rome, joining chorus, rejoiceth in hymns and songs; and we celebrate, O brethren, observing this most honored day, crying: Rejoice, O apostle Peter, thou true friend of thy Teacher, Jesus Christ our God! Rejoice, O most beloved Paul, thou preacher of the Faith and teacher of the whole world! As ye have boldness, O ye two holy and chosen ones, entreat Christ our God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: theotokion, in the same tone —

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. With the holy apostles entreat Him, we pray thee, O Mistress, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

O first enthroned among the apostles and teachers of the whole world: entreat the Master of all, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the apostles, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: ­theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

The spiritual choir of the apostles hath been mystically sent into the world by God Most High; and they have been shown forth as physicians for the suffering. And calling upon the Unity in three Hypostases, they have wisely described the divine incarnation of the Lord Emmanuel. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

O Virgin, we hymn thee, the unburnt bush which Moses saw, the mountain of God, the holy cloud, the undefiled tabernacle, the God-pleasing table, the palace of the King Most High, the most splendid and impassable gate.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

O divine clarions of the Comforter declaring the inspiration of the words of salvation, make ye proclamation to the world. O apostles of the divine Light, rousing those who sleep in the darkness of deception, lead them to the light of divine knowledge, entreating Christ God, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when taking flesh in thy womb, the one Lord remained God while becoming man, and even after thy birthgiving He preserved thee, the Virgin Mother, most immaculate, as thou wast before giving birth. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy.

Ode I

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul, with 8 troparia, including the irmos, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor Peter and hymn Paul with understanding”, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O Lord, grant me the gifts of Thine all-holy Spirit like drops of rain, fitting discourse; and I shall rejoice, faithfully praising the corrections of Thy foremost apostles.

O all-praised Peter, zealously thou didst forsake transitory things and didst follow in the steps of Christ; and leaving behind thine unbelief, O Paul, thou didst follow Him Who called thee.

O apostles Peter and Paul, receiving the grace of the divine Spirit which descended upon you in essence, ye traversed the world, teaching the ends of the earth.

*Theotokion:* The most eloquent of orators and musical tongues of exalted sound are unable to honor or hymn thee, O pure one; for in thee alone have divine mysteries which transcend man been wrought.

Canon of the twelve apostles, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the wise apostles of Christ”, the composition of Theophanes,

in the same tone —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

O Christ, in that Thou art God grant unto me, who desire to hymn the choir of the apostles, the radiance of the all-holy Spirit and the light of Thy wisdom through their supplications.

Strengthened by Thy power and grace, O Christ, Thine honored apostles destroyed the power of the adverse foe, in that they have become seers of God through Thine expansive gesture.

Working healings by Thy name, O Master, the glorious apostles looked upon the multitudes of the nations and illumined them with Thy light.

Having learned heavenly wisdom, O all-wise and all-glorious apostles of Christ, with your successful preaching ye manifestly showed the overweening discourse of the ungodly to be foolish.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin Mother, thou gavest birth to One of the all-divine Trinity, Who through thee hath shown Himself to be like unto us in the flesh, through the good pleasure of Him Who begat Him, and through the activity of the all-holy Spirit.

Ode III

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine commemoration establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Andrew, thy kinsman, O Peter, showed thee Christ the Messiah, and thou didst approach Him with faith; and thou, O wondrous Paul, wast enlightened by Ananias with divinely ordained baptism.

With the enlightenment of grace Peter brought in the race of Israel, which had fallen, deceived by the letter of the law; and Paul delivered the flock of the nations from ­falsehood.

Thou didst send Thy disciples to the nations naked and simple, bearing Thy holy name instead of a sword, O Christ; and with faith they set at nought the warfare of falsehood.

*Theotokion:* O all-praised apostles Peter and Paul, all the earth was full of the knowledge of the Lord Who shone forth from the Virgin and hath restored the world by your divine preaching.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Divinely proclaiming the heavenly and precious doctrines on earth, and declaring them with fiery tongues, O preachers of Christ, ye transmitted them.

O Master, Thou didst show forth Thy disciples as noetic heavens which declare Thy glory to all the ends of the earth.

O all-wise ones who were inscribed in the heavens and revealed as dwelling with Christ, preserve us now who honor you with love.

*Theotokion:* He Who dwelleth in the highest and hath made His abode among us, O all-pure one, hath manifested Himself, receiving flesh from thee without seed.

Sessional hymn of the 12 apostles, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross…” —

O ye who have made your abode in unapproachable Light, as habitations of the Light, ye ever illumine your holy temple with divine proclamations. Wherefore, with faith we cry out: Entreating the Creator, O apostles, deliver us from darkness, from all manner of misfortunes and the cruel invasion of pagans.

Glory…: sessional hymn of the apostles Peter & Paul, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Let us praise Peter and the all-wise Paul, the great and radiant luminaries, who have been shown to be the preëminent disciples; for, shining with the fire of the divine Spirit, they have utterly consumed the darkness of falsehood. Wherefore, they have worthily been shown to be citizens of the kingdom on high, sharing the throne of grace. For this cause we cry out to them: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory.

Now & ever…: theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, gavest birth without seed to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and cry out together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Ode IV

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God — the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin — the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Piously joining the mighty with the lowly, orators with the unlearned, O Peter and Paul, apostles of Christ, ye won the victory.

The godly Peter denounced the cruel apostate Simon Magus as a lover of gold, and now the wise Paul hath rendered blind the steps of Elymas, who blasphemed Christ.

Though the fisherman and the tent-maker were coarse of speech, yet have they seasoned with divine salt the souls of those who love wisdom and led them to Christ by faith.

*Theotokion:* Of old, with divinely inspired speech the divine Habbakuk called thee the pure and overshadowed mountain of Him Who cometh from the south and is incarnate of thee, O Mistress, manifestly making declaration.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The sound of the words of the divine apostles passed through the whole world like fire, burning up the tinder of falsehood and illumining the assemblies of the pious with grace.

The ungodly world, benighted in gloom, did the disciples of the Lord, the divinely radiant beacons, illumine with rays of grace, shown forth by the effulgence of their ­preaching.

Illumined by the sacred rays of the noetic Sun, ye shine forth in the world like the sun, O all-praised ones, dispelling the gloom of falsehood with divine light.

Possessing Thy Cross as a staff of power, O Word, those who themselves beheld Thee divided the salty sea of life, roiling the waters of polytheism like steeds.

*Theotokion:* The animate heaven of Thee, O Christ, the King of kings, adorned with divers effulgences, the all-pure Virgin is now glorified as the Theotokos.

Ode V

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

In that thou art steadfast, O Peter, Christ called thee a stone, and on thee did He set the Church, against which the gates of hell will not prevail; and thee, O Paul, He called His vessel, chosen to bear His name before the nations.

Peter denied the Teacher thrice, and thrice made himself His by declaring his love for Him; and Paul, who before was a blasphemer who grievously oppressed the faithful, later preached Him Whom he before had persecuted.

An incorruptible name and everlasting glory have Peter and Paul obtained from Christ; for the one hath received the keys of heaven, and the other, caught up into paradise, heard ineffable words which surpass men’s understanding.

*Theotokion:* Full of the divine Spirit, Isaiah foretold the birth without father of Emmanuel, God with us, from thee, O pure Virgin, Whom thou didst bear. Wherefore, we all hymn thee.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Thy divine and all-wise ministers hast Thou shown forth in the world as light, proclaiming Thee, the never-waning Light, unto all.

Having manifestly passed through every virtue, O apostles, ye have destroyed the divers webs of the demons’ malice.

Speaking with fiery tongues, O apostles, ye have revealed to us the effulgence of the ­Trinity, the Godhead in unity.

Ode VI

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Splendid were the miracles of Peter, and wondrous the signs of Paul: for their garments and handkerchiefs work healings when placed upon the sick.

The truly glorious Peter and the truly wondrous Paul, the two godly ones, the most precious habitations of the life-creating Trinity, are commemorated by all.

Like a divine and excellent physician Peter hath healed the souls and bodies of the sick, and Paul hath enlightened the nations, signing them with the light of the Lord.

*Theotokion:* We must needs hymn thee, yet are truly unable to do so worthily; wherefore, we hymn thee with silence, honoring the ineffable mystery wrought in thee, O Virgin.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Having made Thy disciples steadfast through wisdom and miracles, Thou didst make them stronger than the foolish prating of the Greeks; and they have abolished their false precepts.

The divine rivers of wisdom have filled all the vales of the Church with salvific waters of salvation, enriching them with streams from the wellsprings of salvation.

Revealed as living stars, O all-praised ones, ye destroyed all the darkness of falsehood with radiant effulgence, shining forth the light of divine knowledge.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, the noetic Bridegroom found thee to be a perfect and all-comely turtle-dove, a radiant lily and blossom of the valley; and He made His abode within thee.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

Christ the Rock doth radiantly glorify the rock of Faith, the most excellent of His disciples, as He doth Paul and the assembly of the twelve today; and, faithfully celebrating their memory, we glorify Him Who glorified them.

*Ikos:* Celebrating now your most honored and all-blessed memory, in hymns we earnestly cry out to you: O all-radiant and divinely luminous beacons of the world, ye twelve beloved disciples of Christ, in that ye have boldness before Him, pray for us; for to you hath been given the grace to heal and forgive sins. Wherefore, earnestly entreat Him, that we be delivered from sins and temptations, that we may glorify Him Who alone loveth mankind, Who hath glorified you.

Ode VII

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Peter was called blessed by Christ when he called Him the Son of the living God; and Paul was honored as a right profitable vessel; and they cried: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Peter made wise the servants of the law as He was commanded, and Paul enlightened the gentiles; and both cleaved unto Christ through grace and cried: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As a most excellent shepherd of Christ Peter hath received the flock, and Paul became their divine teacher; and they cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Mary, excellent in holiness, O Virgin who gavest birth to God in the flesh, O pure one who knewest not wedlock: entreat Him, that He deliver us from every assault and from sin.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

O All-good One Who wast God before nature, making Thy disciples sons Thou didst lovingly show them to be heirs of the inheritance of the Father, and it was Thy good pleasure that they walk with Thee, their God and Master.

Bestowing an outpouring of wisdom, breadth of heart and right eloquent tongues upon Thy godly disciples, O Word, Thou didst send them forth to preach the Gospel of the kingdom to all the ends of the earth.

The apostles, shown to be clouds of the light of God, let fall life-creating water as rain upon all, crying: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou wast revealed as wholly adorned by the glory of God, O all-pure one, Mother and Virgin who alone didst conceive God the Word Who existed from before the beginning of time. Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Strengthened by divine power, Peter resurrected the dead Tabitha; and Paul raised up the dead Eutyches, who had fallen from a great height; and both cry out: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having received an awesome and wondrous vision, Peter enlightened Cornelius, and Paul baptized Gaius, Crispus, Panestius and Stephaninus; and both cry out: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

At night, by His angel, Christ released Peter, who was fettered and kept under guard; and while Paul and Silas were praying, their feet made fast in stocks, He set them free and caused the prison to quake. Wherefore, they hymn Christ forever.

*Theotokion:* Deliver us from the most pernicious passions, and break asunder now the bonds of offenses wherewith each is bound; for we all have sinned, and, being guilty, we ask purification. Through thine entreaties, O Theotokos, grant it to us who exalt Christ supremely forever.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With the fire of the Spirit the divine and all-wise choir of the apostles utterly consumed many of the sanctuaries of the demons as though they were tares, and have enlightened the hearts of the faithful, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

O godly disciples and apostles of Christ, who together have thundered forth to us the commandments of God, ye havens of the faith and common benefactors of mankind: Serve ye the Savior, that we may honor you.

Let us honor the most precious vessels, the receptacles of the virtues, the first-fruits of humanity, the clarions of preaching, the torrents of life incorruptible, the God-bearing flashes of lightning, the wellsprings of healing, the beautiful feet of the Gospel.

*Theotokion:* He Who is full humbleth Himself for our sake, that we may share in His fullness; for the Infinite One, entering into thine all-pure womb, became incarnate without leaving the bosom of the Father. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed, O Mary Bride of God.

Ode IX

Canon of the Apostles Peter & Paul

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Ye passed over all the world, soaring as on wings, preaching the Gospel of Christ to all tribes, nations and lands; and ye have brought them to the Faith, O all-blessed Peter and wondrous apostle Paul.

Having attained an advanced age, O Peter, discharging the debts of nature ye endured the cross in emulation of thy Teacher Christ. And when thy head was cut off, O Paul, — O the wonder! — instead of blood milk poured forth in torrents, converting the unbelieving.

O ye two godly ones, who wisely dedicated yourselves to the souls of the whole world, converting them from ungodliness to piety, and, even after your death, have saved the souls of the faithful: be ye now mindful of us, and intercede before Christ, O preëminent apostles.

*Theotokion:* O good Savior Who lovest mankind by nature and art full of loving-­kindness: through the divine entreaties of Thine all-hymned Virgin Mother and the supplications of Thine apostles Peter and Paul, send down Thy mercy and aid upon us from heaven.

Canon of the 12 Apostles

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Having received from the Master the authority to loose the bonds of transgressions, O ye who have beheld God, mercifully cleanse us of sins who hymn you, and vouchsafe unto us salvation.

O glorious apostles who learned exalted preaching and doctrine in the upper chamber, ye have all received the full effulgence of the Spirit which was made manifest to you essentially; and now ye are called blessed, as is meet.

Now Christ bestoweth never-fading wreaths upon you, His friends, as ye rest; and He filleth you with divine vision. Entreat Him now, that He save all the Churches.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to come in the flesh, He Who hath adorned all things by His word made His abode within thee, found thee to be holier than all others, and hath shown thee to be the true Theotokos, O Virgin Mother.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples…” —

Let us hasten together joyously to praise the twelve most honored disciples, crying: ­Rejoice, O ye who travelled the world over, drew the nations from among the toils of unbelief and taught them things divine!

Glory…:

O ye faithful, let us all praise the choir of the twelve today, having been confirmed by them; and let us cry out to Christ: Through their prayers, O Savior, bring peace to Thy world!

Now & ever…: Theotokion:

In thee do we boast, O Theotokos, and thee do we have as our intercession before God. Stretch forth thine arm and crush our enemies, and send to thy servants help from the Holy One.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…” —

O supreme foundation of the apostles, having forsaken all things thou didst follow after thy Teacher, crying out to Him: “I will die with Thee, that I may live the blessed life!” And thou wast the first bishop of Rome, the glory and boast of the greatest of cities, O Peter, and the confirmation of the Church against which the gates of hell will truly not prevail, as Christ hath foretold. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Parted from thy mother’s womb, thou didst avoid all the burden of material greatness, truly soaring aloft on wings of divine love to heights divine, O Paul, where, entering into the all-radiant darkness of the divine Light like one of the incorporeal ones, and being enriched with the teachings of ineffable discourses, thou wast sent to those in darkness, to proclaim the light of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.

O Savior, Thou Light from before time began: when it was Thy good pleasure to come to me, a man, in Thine ineffable love for mankind, and to become flesh in Thy goodness, Thou didst show forth the apostles, Thy disciples, as secondary lights of Thine effulgence, brilliant flashes of lightning; and when they were sent forth they illumined all creation with Thy divine light, entreating Thee to save and enlighten our souls.

O Peter and Paul, ye husbandmen of the Word, O Andrew, James and John all-wise, Bartholemew and Philip, Thomas and Matthew, Simon, Jude and godly James, ye twelve universally honored disciples who preached throughout the world the most Holy Trinity, God Who is eternal in essence, ye truly impregnable ramparts and unshakable pillars of the Church: entreat the Master of all, that we be saved.

Glory…, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone VIII —

O disciples of the Savior, ye traversed creation, enlightening it and consuming the falsehood of idolatry like tinder with your teachings, and, having drawn the nations out of the abyss of ignorance unto divine understanding, ye saved them. And now, pray ye to Christ, that He be merciful to us on the day of judgment.

Now & ever…: theotokion, in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III & 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the twelve apostles.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §131

\[I Cor. 4:9-16\]

Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Mark, §12 \[3:13-19\]

At that time, Jesus went up into a mountain, and called unto Him whom He would: and they came unto Him. And He ordained twelve, that they should be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils. And Simon he surnamed Peter; and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, He surnamed Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder; and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphæus, and Thaddæus, and Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

