THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT MARTYR

THEODORE THE GENERAL

AT VESPERS:

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera: 3 in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “When from the Tree...” —

Wholly didst thou bring thyself to Him Who gave thee perfect life, O most blessed one, as a living and animate whole-burnt offering, a sacrifice most pure and well-pleasing. Wherefore, thou hast become a right acceptable intercessor, rescuing from the tempest all who hymn thee with faith and call upon thee, O martyr Theodore.

Diligently didst thou cultivate the seed of the Word which was sown in thy soul, and thou didst increase it through the pangs of thy suffering; and wisely laid up in the granaries of heaven, thou didst find incorruptible delight, wherein now revelling, O blessed one, by thy mediations before Christ save those who hymn thee with faith.

O martyr and passion-bearer of Christ, by thine entreaties save those who are in divers needs, repelling every evil circumstance, driving away soul-destroying grief, and beseeching mercy and grace for us, that, saved by thy supplications, we may hymn thine honored struggles, rejoicing, O Theodore.

And 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...” —

A courageous athlete, an invincible warrior wast thou shown to be by the Holy Spirit, casting down the adversary with the wisdom of thy words and wisely by patient manifestations of thy deeds. Wherefore, thou hast received crowns of victory and hast been joined to the choirs on high, O great martyr Theodore.

A pillar of godly piety wast thou, O thou who art most rich, detesting the temples of the impious, brought as a most perfect lamb and an acceptable immolation unto Him Who was blamelessly sacrificed for thy sake, Who glorified thy holy memory, and bestowed thee as a treasury of miracles upon those who are in the world, O Theodore.

Lifted up upon a cross, thy flesh lacerated, wounded with sharp arrows, beset with pain through all manner of the tormentors’ skills, thou wast shown to be unbowed and invincible through the power of Him Who was nailed to the Cross, O Theodore, glory of the martyrs.

Glory..., in Tone V —

Today hath the honored memory of Christ’s passion-bearer shone forth more brightly than the morning star, invisibly illumining the hearts of the faithful and dispelling the clouds from their souls through the activity of the grace of the Spirit. To Him let us cry out, O ye who love the martyrs: O thou divinely bestowed grace who hath been revealed to the faithful, who spreadest forth multitudes of miracles upon those who flee unto thee, O blessed Theodore: Unceasingly entreating Christ, fail not to obtain eternal blessings for those who honor thy memory with faith.

Now & ever..., from the Pentecostarion or Theotokion; or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...” —

Once the Ewe-lamb, beholding her Lamb hastening to the slaughter, followed earnestly, crying out these words to Him: “Whither goest Thou, O Christ my Child most sweet? Wherefore runnest Thou this swift course so diligently, O Thou Who art long-suffering? O Jesus most desired, sinless, most merciful Lord: grant a word unto me, Thy handmaid, O my most beloved Son. Spurn not in silence her who gave Thee birth in manner most strange, O compassionate, most compassionate God, Who grantest the world great mercy.”

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory...: idiomelon, in Tone VIII —

O all ye faithful, as is meet let us bless the great and noble martyr Theodore, as the namesake of God’s gifts and the heir of His blessedness, the champion of the world, for he entreateth Christ God in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever..., Theotokion; or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...” —

“I cannot bear, O my Child, to behold Thee dying upon the Tree, O Thou Who givest courage unto all, that Thou mightest give divine and saving courage unto those who of old fell into the sleep of perdition through the fruit of disobedience,” weeping, said the Virgin, whom we magnify.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Through true recruitment didst thou become a most comely general of the heavenly King, O passion-bearer Theodore; for with the weaponry of faith thou didst wisely array thyself, didst vanquish legions of demons and didst show thyself forth as a victorious athlete. Wherefore, we ever bless thee with faith.

AT MATINS:

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyrica; and the canon of the greatmartyr, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With divine praises I hymn thee who art the namesake of divine gifts,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

A martyr manifestly adorned with splendors, thou dost stand before Christ the Benefactor, arrayed by Him, for thou art the namesake of divine gifts, O martyr Theodore.

Armed with the divine weaponry of faith, thou didst steadfastly cut down the soul-destroying ­legions of the enemy, O Theodore; and as victor thou hast been crowned with the martyrs.

Showing forth the splendid courage of thy soul before the ungodly emperor, O divinely wise one, thou didst put him to shame by the wisdom of thy words and the grace of thy deeds, O Theodore.

*Theotokion:* By the will of the Father and through the divine Spirit thou didst conceive the Son of God without seed, and didst give birth in the flesh unto Him Who was begotten of the Father without mother, and Who for our sake was born of thee without father.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Like a mighty commander thou didst vanquish the legion of the ungodly, and didst trample down all the wiles of the pernicious serpent.

In that thou wast earnest of soul, O glorious one, with pious intent thou didst destroy the adulterous temples of the ungodly.

With force of mind didst thou endure the assaults of the cruel foe, emulating the life-creating death of the Judge of the contest.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, in manner transcending nature thou alone hast become the mediatress of blessings for those on earth. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...” —

Having put on the armor of God and destroyed the falsehood of idolatry, thou didst move the angels to praise thy struggles; for, having set thy mind afire with divine love, thou didst manfully endure a fiery death. Wherefore, true to thy name, thou bestowest divine gifts upon those who ask, O passion-bearer Theodore; for which cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who lovingly honor thy memory.

Glory..., Now & ever: of the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion —

Having fallen into the subtle temptations of enemies, visible and invisible, beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, I flee to the haven of thy goodness, O pure one, as to my fervent assistance and protection. Wherefore, O all-pure one, ­earnestly entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee without seed in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly pray to thee, O all-pure Theotokos, ever beseeching Him to grant remission of our offenses unto us who hymn thy glory as is meet.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Virgin and Mother of Jesus, beholding the Creator upon the Tree, groaned, weeping, and was smitten with grief, her soul and body rent asunder, smiting herself, crying out to Him bitterly, and lifting up her voice: “Woe is me, O my Son! How can I endure Thy passion, the nails and the spear, I who without pain gave Thee birth? But haste Thou to arise, that I may see Thee, my Son and God, that my lamentation and pain may cease, and that they who hymn Thy sufferings may receive remission of their offenses.”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst wound the serpent who wished to wound thee, and by thy steadfast opposition thou didst show thyself to be a martyr, earnestly chanting unto Him Who gave thee strength: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having laid waste to thy flesh with many wounds, thou didst set thy mind immovable, O thrice-blessed one, chanting earnestly unto Him Who gave thee strength: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst adorn thyself, joining thine honored sufferings to the sufferings of the Master, O all-wise one, and thou wast vouchsafed His radiance and longed-for beauty.

*Theotokion:* Without tasting of wedlock thou gavest birth, O Virgin, and after thy birthgiving thou wast shown to be a virgin still. Wherefore, unceasingly and with steadfast faith we cry out to thee, O Mistress: Rejoice!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With the shedding of the blood of thy flesh thou didst put an end to the blood offered to the demons unto destruction, O invincible Theodore.

O, the pious demeanor! O, the noble mind! O, the most fervent faith of the honored athlete, whereby he acquired God!

Possessed of a mind illumined by the light of God, thou didst cast into darkness the serpent, the champion of evil, O God-bearing Theodore.

*Theotokion:* Thee do we wield as an invincible weapon against the enemy; thee have we acquired as the confirmation and hope of our salvation, O Bride of God.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Stretched out upon a cross and transfixed with nails, presenting an image of the saving Passion of the Creator, O blessed one, thou didst with bold ardor vanquish those who are cast down.

When thou wast imprisoned in the dungeon, lawfully contesting, Christ appeared unto thee, raising thee up to feats of battle against the enemy, in that He is the Judge of the contest, O all-glorious one.

To Him Who willingly offered Himself as a sacrifice for thy sake didst thou bring thyself as a sacrifice pure, holy and unblemished, O passion-bearer Theodore.

*Theotokion:* O wonder greatest of all wonders! As Virgin thou didst without knowing man conceive in thy womb Him Who sustaineth all things, yet didst not confine Him therein.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...” —

Arrayed in faith with manliness of soul, and taking in hand the word of God as a spear, thou didst vanquish the enemy, O Theodore, great among the martyrs. With them cease thou never to entreat Christ God in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Come, all ye faithful, and with wreaths of hymnody let us crown Theodore, the most radiant adornment of athletes; for in the splendor of his miracles he is shown to be God’s great gift to the world. Having vanquished Belial the enemy by his honored sufferings, he sendeth down as dew streams of healings with the drops of his blood. In all these things doth Christ rejoice, and He granteth everlasting peace. Wherefore, we cry out to the martyr: Pray thou unceasingly for us all!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

In the furnace of thy struggles didst thou utterly consume the fuel of impiety, O glorious martyr, and thou wast a beacon of piety, chanting: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

As a commander wise and sober in deed, thou didst prevail over the senseless and ungodly emperor; and, strengthened by the power of the Spirit, thou didst show him to be powerless.

By the praises of thy greatness is the law overcome; for with the most radiant effulgence of torment didst thou shine forth, O Theodore, crying out to thy Master: Blessed is the might of Thy dominion!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O divine and sanctified habitation of the Most High, for through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been imparted to those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

“Trusting in Thee, Who for my sake didst endure the Cross and death, I have been lifted up upon a cross, O Master, and am pierced by arrows and am touched by grievous wounds, O Lord,” thou didst cry out amid thy suffering, O noble-minded martyr Theodore.

Rejoicing, thou didst offer thyself as a pure sacrifice to thy Creator, O Theodore, and translated to the kingdom of heaven, O glorious one, with the martyrs thou dost ever cry out in sacred manner: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Like a lily, like a noetic rose, dost thou perfume us with the sweet savor of thy sufferings, ever dispelling the stench of our passions with grace, and constraining us to sing with fragrant souls: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou alone among all generations wast shown to be the Mother of God, O most pure Virgin. Thou was not consumed by the fire of the unapproachable Light. Wherefore, we all bless thee, O Mary, thou Bride of God.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Adorned by thy sufferings, abiding and rejoicing with the assemblies of the blessed and the choirs of martyrs, thou now standest, crowned, before Him Whom thou didst desire, O Theodore.

Caught up to the heights of heaven, having spurned earthly things, thou wast accounted worthy of the end for which thou didst long, receiving the very perfection of desires, rejoicing, O Theodore.

Having boldness before God, as a noble and wise athlete ask thou remission of offenses for us who praise thee with love, delivering us all from sufferings and sorrows.

The divinely wise martyr, desiring Thee alone, the immortal Word, Who suffered and died in the flesh, having received Thine immortality, hath made his abode in the heavens, in the presence of Thee, the almighty Creator of all.

*Theotokion:* Come ye all, and with faith and love let us unceasingly praise the blessed Mary, the Virgin Mother of God, having on her account received joy everlasting.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars...” —

Adorned with comeliness, a right mighty commander, a warrior glorious among athletes, thou didst offer thyself to Christ, and wast shown to be a divine gift to the world, O Theodore.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

By thy mighty protection keep all of us, thy servants, unharmed by the assaults of the enemy, O pure one, for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge amid our needs.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory..., in Tone VIII —

Having set for thyself a feat of prowess, thou didst manfully contend against deception, O Theodore; and with the fiery eloquence of thy tongue didst put to shame the inhumanity of Licinius. Wherefore, rejoicing with the angels, O blessed one, beseech Christ God, that He be merciful to us on the day of judgment.

Now & ever..., of the feast, or Theotokion; or the Stavrotheotokion set forth in Vespers for the Aposticha.

AT LITURGY:

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 of the feast, or of the Octoechos; and 4 from Ode III of the canon to the great martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall rejoice in the Lord and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to Timothy, §292 \(II Tim 2:1-10\)

Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Do thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* Those who are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God shall they blossom forth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §36

\(Matt 10:16-22\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given to you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end shall be saved.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

