The 1st Day Of The Month Of October

The Protection Of Our All-Holy Mistress,

The Theotokos And Ever-Virgin Mary

\(for this day we provide also the service for the holy apostle Ananias and our holy father Romanus the Melodist\)

If the church is dedicated to the Theotokos, or if the rector so desireth, we celebrate an all-night vigil thus:

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera idiomela, in Tone I —

God Who alone resteth on the thrones in the highest granted His favored one to behold that which transcendeth earthly things when he stretched forth his all-divine hands in supplication, entreating thee, O Mistress, in behalf of his city and people, praying: “O our Lady, cover us now with the omophorion of thy mercy!” *Twice*

O all-pure Virgin, Bride of God who knewest not wedlock, protection and help of men: With thy precious omophorion thou dost protect against the assaults of adversaries the city which honoreth and glorifieth thee as is meet.

O Mother of God, thou animate palace of Christ, bulwark, protection and might of the faithful: Through thee is thy city saved, with thy help are Orthodox rulers crowned, and those who boast in thee win victories over the heathen; for thou coverest us with the omophorion of thy mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VI —

Come, ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, let us hymn the all-holy Virgin! For today the angels and saints celebrate the honored protection of the Mother of God, and summon us mortals to cry out in praise with unceasing voices: Rejoice, O miraculous adornment of the Church and all-wondrous protection of the whole world! Rejoice, O ally of faithful kings in battle and preservation of warriors! Rejoice, our protection and help! For thee doth the Christian race unceasingly bless.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…” —

There is glory in the heavens and gladness on earth; for the Queen prayeth in the church with all the saints for all of us.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

Come to the holy church, O ye faithful, for there the Theotokos doth protect the people against all the assaults of the enemy with her omophorion.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

O all-pure Theotokos, forget us not who are thy servants, but pray thou for us who hymn thee with faith.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone III —

Come, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us bless the honored protection of the Mother of God; for she hath mercifully stretched forth her hands to her Son, and the world hath been shielded by her holy protection. Wherefore, with mouth and heart, with hymns and spiritual songs, let us splendidly celebrate with all who have recourse unto her.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, we, the right faithful people, celebrate today with splendor, and gazing at thine all-precious image, we say with compunction: Cover us with thy precious omophorion, and deliver us from all evil, entreating thy Son, Christ our God, that He save our souls.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous miracle…” —

O pure Theotokos, wellspring of wisdom, thou art the great help of the grieving, a speedy helper, the salvation and confirmation of the world, an abyss of mercy! We, the faithful, hymn thee, the protection of the world, ineffably praising thy luminous omophorion, saying: Rejoice, for the Lord is with thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy! *Twice*

The wondrous Isaiah prophesied; for he said: “In later times the mountain of the Lord shall manifestly appear, and the house of the Lord shall be upon the summit of the mountain.” O Mistress, we have known thee to be the true fulfillment of this, for the mountains and hills have been adorned with the renowned churches of thy feasts. Wherefore, in gladness we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is with thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy!

Thou art the wondrous adornment of all the faithful, the true fulfillment of the prophecies, the glory of the apostles, the beauty of the martyrs, the boast of virginity and the all-marvelous protection of the whole world! O Mistress, with thine omophorion protect all the pious who cry aloud: Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is with thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy!

And 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

We know thee, O Theotokos, as a divinely planted garden of paradise, the place of the Tree of life, watered by the Holy Spirit, the one who gave birth to the Creator of all Who feedeth the faithful with the bread of life. With the Forerunner entreat Him in our behalf, with thy precious omophorion protecting all pious people from all tribulations. *Twice*

Heaven and earth are sanctified, the Church is made radiant and all the people are glad; for, lo! the Mother of God, arriving invisibly with the angelic armies, the Forerunner and the Theologian, the prophets and the apostles, prayeth to Christ for Christians, that He have mercy upon the city and the people Who glorify the feast of her protection.

Thou art the beauty of Jacob and the heavenly ladder whereby the Lord descended to earth. At that time these images manifested thine honor and glory, O Theotokos. The angels of heaven and mortal men bless thee who gavest birth to the God of all, for thou prayest for the whole world, covering with thy mercy those who celebrate thine honored feast.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VIII —

All the ranks of the noetic beings rejoice with us who spiritually form a material choir, beholding the Queen and Mistress of all most excellently glorified by the faithful. And the spirits of the righteous rejoice, seeing her stretching forth her most precious hands in supplication, asking peace for the world, might and confirmation for kings, and salvation for our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Book of Genesis

Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and said: “How fearful is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”

A Reading from the Prophecy of Ezekiel

Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord.” Then He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the Prince, he shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in by way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, behold, the house was full of the glory of the Lord.

A Reading from Proverbs

Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me,” And to those who want understanding she saith: “Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.” Leave folly, that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge. He who reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he who rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of understanding: for to know the law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.

At Litia, these stichera —

*In Tone III:* The all-radiant feast of thine honored protection hath dawned today, O all-pure Virgin! Brightly thou dost illumine more than the sun the people who with faith and a pure heart confess thee to be the true Mother of God, and cry out to thy Son: O Christ God, through the supplications of the Ever-virgin who gave birth to Thee in purity and without corruption, give not Thine inheritance over to the enemies who wage war upon us, but in that Thou art merciful save our souls in peace.

*In Tone IV:* The people of thy Son desire to chant praise to thee as is meet, O all-pure Mistress, yet they are not able; for thou dost ever help all the faithful, covering them with thy precious ­omophorion; and thou prayest that all may be saved who with faith honor thee as the pure one, the true Theotokos.

*In Tone II:* Assembling today, O ye faithful, let us bless the Mother of Christ God, the all-immaculate and all-pure Virgin Queen of all; for she ever mercifully stretcheth forth her hands to her Son. The all-wondrous Andrew beheld her in the air, covering the people with her precious omophorion. Wherefore, let us cry out to her with compunction: Rejoice, O protection, help and salvation of our souls!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone —

Having purified our minds and thoughts, let us celebrate with the angels, splendidly beginning David’s hymn to the Maiden, the Bride of Christ our God, the King of all, saying: Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness! For having adorned her as a beautiful palace, O Master, at her supplications and by Thy mighty power Thou hast sent her to thy city, to fortify and protect it against pagan adversaries.

At the Aposticha, these stichera —

*In Tone II:* Christ hath given thee to the Christian race as a mighty protection and a helper more exalted than all beings of heaven and earth, more glorious than the cherubim and more honorable than every creature, to protect and save the sinful people who have recourse to thee. Wherefore, O Mistress, we hymn thee, the refuge of all, and celebrate with splendor the honored feast of thy protection, entreating Christ, that He grant us great mercy.

*In Tone V: Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

O ye people, with splendor let us chant a hymn to the Maiden Bride, the Mother of Christ God, the King of all: The Queen stood at Thy right hand, O Master, clothed in robes of gold and all-adorned with divine beauty. For having adorned her, His chosen one, more than all the women of the world, in His great mercy He was well-pleased to be born of her; and He hath given her, the only blessed one, to His people as a helper, to edify and to protect His servants from all misfortunes.

*In Tone VII:* *Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Thou art a mountain greater and more glorious than Mount Sinai, O Theotokos: for, unable to bear the descent of the glory of God in images and shadows, it burned with fire, and thunder and lightning smote it; but thou, without being consumed, didst wholly bear in thy womb God the Word, the divine fire, Who holdeth all things in His hand. As thou hast maternal boldness before Him, O Mistress, help those who celebrate thine honored feast with faith, and forget us not, but visit us with mercy; for thou hast received from God the gift to edify and protect thy servants, thy Christian flock.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone II —

The Church of God is adorned with thine honored protection as with an all-radiant crown, O most pure Theotokos, and, rejoicing, it shineth today and mystically joineth chorus, crying out to thee, O Mistress: Rejoice, precious raiment and diadem of the glory of God! Rejoice, thou who alone art the perfection of glory and everlasting gladness! Rejoice, O refuge, deliverance and salvation of us who have recourse to thee!

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, we, the right faithful people, celebrate today with splendor, and gazing at thine all-precious image, we say with compunction: Cover us with thy precious omophorion, and deliver us from all evil, entreating thy Son, Christ our God, that He save our souls.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the troparion again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III —

Surrounded by the divine radiance of the angelic armies and with the ranks of the prophets and apostles, and receiving their worshipful ministrations as Mother of God, visit us, thy servants, entreating Christ our God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI —

O all-pure Mother of God, thou art truly the strength of the helpless. Wherefore, we who have been cast down are raised up by thee, and in thee are we borne aloft, for thou art the protection of all and our mediator before God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

It is meet to magnify thee, O Theotokos, who art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare than the seraphim.

Or this magnification —

We magnify thee, O all-immaculate Mother of Christ our God, and we honor thy labors and thy precious omophorion, for the holy Andrew beheld thee in the air, entreating Christ in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of the God of heaven. \[Ps. 90: 1\]

B With His shoulders will He overshadow thee, and under His wings shalt thou have hope. \[Ps. 90: 4\]

A For He hid me in His tabernacle, in the day of my troubles He sheltered me. \[Ps. 26: 5\]

B Let the sons of men hope in the shelter of Thy wings. \[Ps. 35: 8\]

A For I shall go to the place of the wondrous tabernacle, even to the house of God. \[Ps. 41: 5\]

B And I said: Who will give me wings like a dove? And I will fly, and be at rest. \[Ps. 54: 7\]

A My soul trusted in Thee; and in the shadow of Thy wings will I hope. \[Ps. 56: 2\]

B With length of days will I satisfy him, and I will show him My salvation. \[Ps. 90: 16\]

Glory… Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God! Thrice

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Spread out on thine all-pure and incorrupt hands, thine all-precious omophorion—shining immaterially, spiritually, with greater luster than electrum, truly more honorable than the ark of old—doth mercifully preserve those who honor the right beauteous feast of thy protection, O Mistress, which, having assembled, we celebrate with fervor.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

I shall commemorate thy name in every generation and generation.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Luke, § 4

\[Lk. 1: 39-49, 56\]

In those days, Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud voice, and said: “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she who believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.” And Mary said: “My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. For He Who is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is His name.” And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VIII —

All the ranks of the noetic beings rejoice with us who spiritually form a material choir, seeing the Queen and Mistress of all most famously glorified by the faithful. And the spirits of the righteous rejoice, beholding her stretching forth her most precious hands in supplication, asking peace for the world, might and confirmation for kings, and salvation for our souls.

Canon of the Theotokos, with 12 troparia, the irmos being chanted twice, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Having entered the church in great glory today as the Mother of God, with the ranks of the holy angels and the assemblies of the prophets and apostles, thou prayest for all Christians and deliverest them from perils and grief, covering them with thy mercy.

Moses called thee the tabernacle and the rod of Aaron, for thou didst put forth Christ, the Tree of life; and as thou hast boldness before Him, O Queen, pray for us who honor thee, that He deliver us from all evil, that we may glorify the feast of thy protection.

Assembling choirs, David danceth, not as he did before the ark of old, but even more now, hastening into thy presence in the church with the ranks of the saints. And bowing low before thee, we say: Pray thou for us, the people who honor thee, that, glorifying thy protection, we may celebrate it with honor.

The ranks of the angels hymned thee, O Theotokos, and the patriarchs and holy hierarchs glorify thee, hastening into thy presence in the church. And the holy Andrew then beheld thee with them, praying to God for us sinners, that He have mercy upon the people who glorify the feast of thy protection.

Katavasia: The same irmoi.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

As an unploughed field thou didst manifestly produce the divine Grain. Rejoice, O animate table holding the Bread of life! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou inexhaustible wellspring of the Water of life!

Standing before thee with faith in thy church, we, thy people, await thy mercy, O Mistress. Visit our lowliness, and with thy holy protection defend the Orthodox people from all evil.

O far-famed Virgin who wast honorably prefigured by the prophets, with the angels they now do thee homage. Pray thou to God with them, that, rejoicing, we may all splendidly celebrate thy holy protection today.

Gideon prefigured thee as a fleece, for Christ God descended upon thee like dew. Pray thou to Him, O Theotokos, that He grant victory to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, that, casting them down like the Midianites, they may render glorious thy holy feast.

O Theotokos, with thy radiant omophorion thou lightest the church and the people more than the rays of the sun, and by thy visitation drivest away the darkness of our sins, praying for us to thy Son and God.

Sessional hymn, in Tone V —

O pure Ever-virgin, fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and unashamed hope, bulwark, protection and refuge of those who have recourse to thee: With the angels beseech thy Son and God, that He grant compunction, salvation and great mercy to the world.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

O most hymned Virgin, we cry out to thee with voices of hymnody: Rejoice, thou butter mountain, curdled by the Spirit! Rejoice, O lampstand, O jar bearing the Manna which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious!

O Theotokos, God hath sanctified thee wholly, more than the ark of Aaron, and hath commanded the saints and angels to do thee homage. With them pray for the city and people who render glorious thine honored feast.

O Theotokos, with the councils of all the saints come now in glory unto thy church, as once the holy Andrew beheld thee in the air, radiantly praying for Christians; and grant us thy mercy.

Strengthen our Orthodox hierarchs against all heresy and schism, as God did David against Goliath, O Mistress, that in gladness we may cry to thee: Rejoice, O holy protection and helper of our city!

With faith do we fall down before thee, O Lady, and, rendering homage with thanksgiving, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin full of the grace of God, our protection and wall of defense, the helper of those in misfortune! Save us who have recourse to thee, for in thee do we place our trust!

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Of old, Solomon described thee as the marriage-couch and bed of the King of heaven, and spake of thee as surrounded by the seraphim, O Theotokos. Wherefore, we now beseech thee, O most holy Mother of God: Protect us from all misfortunes!

To thee do the foremost among the angels and the honored prophets and apostles render service with honor as the Mother of God, beholding thee making supplication for the world; and the Lord, hearkening to thine entreaties, doth save thy city and people, who place their trust in thee.

Isaiah, great among the prophets, foretold thee, saying that without knowing wedlock thou wouldst give birth to God; for thou, O pure Mary, wast more holy than all, in that thou didst bear God in thy womb and in thine arms. To Him pray thou for us, with thy protection covering those who faithfully glorify thee.

Spreading spiritual wings, the councils of the saints came mystically to do thee homage, O Theotokos, beholding thee on the light cloud of glory, praying to Christ the Savior, that He grant victory to our Orthodox hierarchs, that they may prevail over all heresy and schism.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Divinely wise priests, standing in thy church with the pious people, await thy mercy, O Theotokos. Transform our grief into joy, in that thou gavest birth to the Joy Who hath done away with the sins of all men.

To thee doth all the earth offer gifts as to the Queen and Mother of God. Kings and princes bow down in homage, and all the people are glad, protected from all evil by thy supplications, O Theotokos.

Daniel described thee beforehand as a great mountain; for from thee was Christ born without seed. He hath destroyed all the falsehood of the demons, and hath filled all the earth with His Faith. To Him do thou pray for us who glorify the feast of thy protection, O Theotokos.

O all-pure one, we utter unto thee the cry of the angel: Rejoice, O throne of God, whereon Ezekiel beheld the Lord in the guise of a man, upborne by the cherubim! With them pray thou for us, O Theotokos, that He save our souls.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Today the Virgin standeth forth in the church, and with the choirs of the saints she invisibly prayeth to God for us. Angels and hierarchs offer homage, and the apostles and prophets join chorus; for for our sake the Theotokos entreateth the preëternal God.

*Ikos:* Come, O ye people, let us delight in her all-glorious miracles; for through her hath Adam been delivered from corruption. She is the ark fashioned, not by Noah, but by God. Of old, Moses was unable to see God in the fiery bush; but now the whole earth doth acknowledge the Son of God Who was born of her and to Whom she prayeth for us. Wherefore, we glorify her as the Mother of God; for for our sake the Theotokos entreateth the preëternal God.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

O Virgin, thou wast not described by the many prophets and wast also unknown to the angels of heaven who minister to God; but now we all know thee to be the Theotokos, and are in need of thy help and aid, O blessed one.

O Virgin Theotokos, thou mountain curdled by the Spirit, which Habbakuk saw pouring forth the sweetness of healing upon the faithful: Heal us who cry out to thy Son: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

He Who bowed down the heavens made His abode within thee, O Virgin, and now regardeth thy supplication, fulfilling thy petitions, O pure Queen and Theotokos. To Him do thou now earnestly pray, for we place our hope in thee, O blessed one.

O Christ God, our Creator and Savior: Accept the entreaty of Thy Mother, which she offereth to Thee for us sinners, that, rejoicing, we may chant to Thee: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With the ranks of the angels, the honorable and glorious prophets, the preëminent apostles, the hieromartyrs and holy hierarchs, O Mistress, pray thou to God for us sinners who render glorious the feast of thy protection in this land.

Cast down pride and arrogance, scatter the councils of unjust princes, and destroy those who instigate wars, O Mother of God, most honored Queen! And exalt the horn of our Orthodox hierarchs, that we may render glorious thy feast, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Offering thee hymnody with our mouths, we bow down before thee spiritually with our souls; for our hearts burn within us. O all-pure Mother of God, have mercy upon us who pray to thee, who hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

I have been weighed down by many sins, and am at a loss how to write in praise of thy protection, O Theotokos; but as thou art the Mother of God, adorn thy feast with miracles, that, rejoicing, we may all hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

O exalted King Who sittest with the Father and art hymned by the seraphim: Look down upon the supplication of Thy Mother, which she offereth to Thee for us sinners, and wash away our sins. Save this city and multiply the people. Grant health of body and victory over all adversaries to the Orthodox, through the prayers of her who gave Thee birth.

O divinely chosen Virgin, we cry out to thee with the voice of the angel: Rejoice, thou who hast led Adam back into paradise! Rejoice, thou who drivest the demons away by thy name! Rejoice, O hope of Christians! Rejoice, sanctification of souls! Rejoice, preserver of our city!

Remember us in thy supplications, O Virgin Lady and Theotokos, that we not perish because of the multitude of our sins. Protect us from all evil and grievous perils, for in thee do we place our trust, and, honoring the feast of thy protection, we magnify thee.

As Mother of God, thou hast received from God the gift to heal the infirmities of all Christians, to deliver them from misfortunes, to forgive their sins and save them from captivity and all want. Disdain us not, O Lady, for thou knowest that we are in need of health for our bodies and salvation for our souls.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

O all-holy Lady, Virgin Theotokos, cover us with thy wondrous omophorion, preserving the hierarchs and people from all evil, as the all-wondrous Andrew beheld thee praying in the Church of Blachernæ. And send down thy great mercy upon us, O Lady. *Thrice*

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

We fall down before thee, O Lady, and rendering homage, we entreat thee with compunction: Rejoice, O Mistress blessed of God, O Virgin of great renown, who wast prefigured with honor by the prophets! For on thee did Christ God descend like dew, and thou gavest birth to Him without knowing wedlock, O pure one, and didst hold in thine arms the Creator and Lord of all. To Him do thou now pray for us who glorify the feast of thy protection with faith. *Twice*

The ranks of angels hymn thee, O Virgin Theotokos, the patriarchs and hierarchs glorify thee, and the holy apostles do thee homage with honor as the Mother of God, beholding thee making entreaty for the world to Christ God, the Savior of all. Unto Him do thou pray, that He deliver the city and people who glorify thee with faith and honor the feast of thy protection.

Through the Holy Spirit God sanctified thee wholly, O Theotokos, more than the ark of Aaron; and we are illumined by thine omophorion more than by the radiance of the sun: for thou dost enlighten the church and the people, dost drive away the darkness of our sins, and deliverest from misfortunes and sorrows those who with faith honor the feast of thy precious protection.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VI —

In that the all-wondrous Andrew beheld thee with a multitude of archangels, with the apostles and prophets, and the vast company of the martyrs, praying to thy Son and our God for the city and people, O Mistress, and covering them by thy precious omophorion, fail not, O all-pure one, to save the excellent inheritance of thy Son, which doth celebrate thine all-honored feast, O thou who art greatly hymned.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Protection.

Prokimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos —

My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my Spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.

*Stichos:* For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 320 \[Heb. 9: 1-7\]

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII —

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Gospel according to Luke, § 54

\[Lk. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28\]

At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha received Him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said: “Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.” And Jesus answered and said unto her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.” And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him: “Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked.” But He said: “Yea, rather, blessed are they who hear the word of God, and keep it.”

Communion Verse —

I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

