The 2nd Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Cyprian

& The Martyr Justina

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Andrew of Constantinople\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” **—**

Through priestly anointing and the blood of martyrdom didst thou draw nigh unto God, O most perfect and all-glorious Cyprian, flower of nature and adornment of eloquence, summit of wisdom, measure of the correctness of the dogmas, most harmonious rightness of the canons and magnificence of the Churches. *Twice*

O most honorable Cyprian, thou glory of athletes and crown of martyrs, by thy discourses thou didst persuade the divinely wise to maintain their courage most valiantly when faced with imprisonment, bondage and divers tortures, the stripping of their bodies, binding and most brutal cold, and finally wounding and death. *Twice*

Countering the spells of the demons with hymns to the Spirit and the sign of the Cross, thou didst preserve thy virginity and didst offer thyself to Christ as a most sacred sacrifice, O unvanquished martyr. Wherefore, thou hast received crowns of victory, O Justina, thou adornèd splendor of virgins and martyrs. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone II —

Thou didst truly spurn the falsehood and lore of idolatrous teaching, and didst arm thyself for salvation with the sword of the Cross, O most blessed Cyprian; and, casting away thy books of sorcery, thou didst put off the old man; and within thee dwelt the divine knowledge of the consubstantial Trinity, Whom do thou beseech with the angels, O hierarch, that we be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

Beholding Thee nailed to the tree of the Cross, O Jesus, she who knew not wedlock said, weeping: “O my Child most sweet, why hast Thou left me alone who gave Thee birth? O unapproachable Light of the all-unoriginate Father, make haste and be Thou glorified, that those who glorify Thy divine sufferings may receive divine glory!”

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone II —

Let us praise Cyprian, the divinely radiant lamp, the converser with Paul and sharer of his labors; for he dwelleth with the angels, having received a crown of incorruption from the one God, and he prayeth that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb led of His own will as a man to the slaughter, she said, weeping: “Dost Thou now make haste to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? What is this that Thou hast done, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine utter goodness, which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Cyprian. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the saints, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thy luminous grace, O good one”, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Dwelling now with the ranks of heaven, O sacred and divine one, look down from heaven upon those who hymn thee piously; and preserve them by thy supplications.

In the cruel grasp of the darkness of ignorance, and enkindled by soul-destroying carnal passions and intemperance, O venerable one, thou didst suddenly undergo an all-glorious transformation, O most blessed one.

Thou didst first occupy the seat of the destroyers, O father, yet didst later glorify Christ on the seat of the priests, having been manifestly transformed by the divine grace of the Master.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst remain a virgin after giving birth; for thou didst bear the Lord and Creator of all Himself, Who in strange and unusual manner revealed Himself to us in a body, O Ever-virgin Theotokos and Mother.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Suffused with spiritual love for Christ like Paul, thou becamest His disciple, O most wise Cyprian.

Christ betrothed Himself to thee, giving thee vesture of glory and a robe of regeneration in place of the garments of the passions.

Having before avidly encouraged the athletes, O most lauded Cyprian, thou wast later also a witness to the Truth.

*Theotokion:* In lordly manner and true do we, the faithful, honor thee, the Theotokos; for thou gavest birth to God in the flesh, O most immaculate one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Chastised severely in thy delusion, like Paul thou wast called from heaven, guided by the Cross to the light of understanding; for, enflamed by love for a chaste virgin, for her sake thou didst join thyself to the Creator of men. Wherefore, having repudiated the weakness of the enemy, with her thou wast counted worthy to join the choir of the martyrs. O Cyprian, adornment of hierarchs, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having fallen into greatly tangled perils from enemies visible and invisible, and been beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, O pure one, I flee to the haven of thy goodness as to my fervent help and protection; wherefore, O all-pure one, earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly praise thee, ever beseeching Him, O all-pure Theotokos, to grant remission of offenses unto those who fittingly hymn thy glory.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Coming to thy senses out of thy former insanity, thou didst renounce all demonic falsehood and soul-corrupting delusion, and didst cry out, rejoicing: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Strengthened with valor, and praying with ardor to the pure and gracious Virgin, Justina eluded the snares and wiles of the enemy.

Fortified by faith in thy Bridegroom, and invested with the power of the Cross, thou didst remain unscathed by the demons, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Free in His nature, He Who assumed all humanity from thee hypostatically, O Ever-virgin Mother, abased Himself by taking on the form of a servant, in the richness of His goodness.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Manifestly having the pure Mother of God as thy champion, O Justina, enriched, thou didst preserve thy precious virginity intact.

Let us honor Justina, the animate and most beautiful image of Christ, the mysterious comeliness, the ornament of which we cannot be deprived.

The true and undefiled bride of Christ weareth a twofold crown, having justly attained it through suffering and fasting.

*Theotokion:* Neither the mind of the angels nor that of men is able to describe the ineffable and all-glorious wonder of thy birthgiving, O most pure one.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thou didst pass from the abyss of malice in the nethermost depths to the highest virtue, O father, and didst mount to the summit, having been most gloriously transformed by divine baptism.

Thou wast first a servant of the demons, but wast later shown to be a divinely revealed disciple of Christ, loving Him, the object of thy desire, with true love.

Thou didst lead many martyrs to the Master, O divinely wise one, showing thyself to be the greatest of merchants, who purchased the kingdom of heaven with a little blood.

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God, who gavest birth to the Master of the law, rend asunder the bonds of mine offenses, freeing me from the law of sin by the law of life.

Kontakion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels…” —

Turning from the sorcerous arts to the knowledge of God, O divinely wise one, thou wast shown to be a most wise physician for the world, with Justina granting healings to those who honor thee, O Cyprian. Pray thou with her to the Master Who loveth mankind, that He save our souls.

*Ikos:* Sending down upon me gifts of thy healings, O holy one, by thy supplications heal my heart, which is afflicted with the sores of sin, that I may now offer thee discourse of hymnody out of my vile mouth, and may hymn thy pangs, O hieromartyr, which thou hast shown to those who draw nigh to God through good and blessed repentance. For, held in His hand, thou hast mounted to the heavens as by a ladder, unceasingly praying that He save our souls.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Having ascended through the hierarchy, thou didst show thyself to the sacred ministers as a most sacred model and rule, crying out: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O father, the change wrought upon thee by the right hand of the Author of life truly made thee a wise proclaimer of God, chanting: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou hast been shown to us as an invincible sword against the adversary, O blessed one, chastising his falsehood; and we chant: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* The choirs of heaven and the celestial companies sing of Him Who was born of thee, O Theotokos, crying: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Be glad, O Jerusalem! Keep festival, ye who love Sion! For the Lord of hosts, Who reigneth forever, is come! Let all the earth show reverence before His face, and let it cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

All-wisely didst thou reject pagan wisdom, O glorious father, and didst cry out the divine tidings of the apostles, which had been sounded by the Spirit and clearly been given utterance by the tongues of fire: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Offering thyself to Christ as a living sacrifice, acceptable and pleasing to God, through the undefiled blood of thy slaughter, O father, thou didst splendidly pass over to the exalted habitations on high, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Vanquished by the grace which dwelt within thee, the hordes of the demons were repulsed and the sufferings of the sick are banished, O divinely wise one; and we, the faithful, are filled with divine light, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Those who with faith call thee the Theotokos, O all-pure Mother of God, rejoice with the angelic hosts over thy birthgiving; for thou gavest birth for us to the Master and Deliverer, to Whom we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

From on high, through thy divine grace and thy supplications, thou watchest over us who piously hymn thee, O divinely eloquent one, bestowing upon us the sword of thy goodwill. Grant peace and salvation unto us, in that thou art a most godly hierarch.

Thy finger imparteth a flood of healings in abundance to those who love thee; and God-bearing women receive thee like a divine treasure, O Cyprian, and fervently reveal what was hidden, that we all may delight in thee.

Direct thou our journey to Christ by thine activity, thy God-pleasing life and most pure ­cleansing, O thou who art most rich, and entreat the serenity of God, in that thou art a compassionate hierarch.

*Theotokion:* By thy power, O all-pure Mother of God, strengthen our spiritual infirmity, and loose the burden imposed upon thy servants, O thou who ineffably shone forth the Sun of righteousness.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

Let us praise Cyprian, the mirror of strugglers, who escaped damnation for his sorceries, transformed his character beyond measure, committed to the flames the books which had led him into delusion, and, as befitteth a priest, received the crown of witness.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

He of evil craftiness, who of old seduced me with the hope of attaining divinity, is himself most wisely deceived by the fleshly appearance of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin. Thus hath carnal condemnation been abolished by the flesh, and death been put to death.

The Aposticha from the Octoechos. Glory…, in Tone VIII —

He who before was the fell champion of malice later became a true teacher of the Church; he who was a minister of the delusion of the idols was revealed as a faithful hierarch; and the fornicator is shown to be chaste of mind, for the sake of an honorable virgin. Through the prayers of them both, save us, O Lord!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Lifted up on the Tree, Thou Who sustainest all creation diest, granting life unto all!” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she saw the God and man Who had shone forth ineffably from her suspended upon the Cross.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the saints.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to Timothy, § 280 \[I Tim. 1: 12-17\]

Timothy my child: I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, Who hath enabled me, for that He counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation: that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to those who should hereafter believe on Him to life everlasting. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone II —

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \[Jn. 10: 9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

