Also On The 2nd Day Of The Month Of October

\(Or, Following The Greek Calendar, The 28th Day Of The Month Of May\)

Commemoration Of The Holy & Blessed Andrew,

The Fool For Christ’s Sake

The following service is provided in the Slavonic Menaion with the rubric that it is to be chanted at compline on the 2nd of October. It is, however, quite unusual, having a full complement of hymns as if it were an independent service. Coinciding as it does with the commemoration of SS Cyprian and Justina, the service could be combined with that for the martyrs… but in that event, much of its hymnody would be omitted \(as would be the case were it used at compline\). It is therefore presented as an independent service \(a single missing stavrotheotokion has been supplied by the translator\), and may be used either \(a\) as an alternative service on 2 October, or on 28 May, or \(b\) combined with the other service for either of those dates, or \(c\) chanted simply as a canon with additional hymns on 2 October, as the Slavonic rubrics suggest.

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O all-glorious wonder! For in thee, O Andrew, was spiritual wisdom perfected in ecstasy of mind! For thou didst consider all things but dung, that thou mightest acquire Christ, and thou didst love the kingdom of heaven, which thou didst receive. Standing now with the angels, O holy one, pray thou for those who fervently honor thy memory.

O all-glorious wonder! Thou didst show the incorporeal beings and didst reveal hidden things to thy favored one Andrew, whose heart was of flesh and who was foolish for Thy sake, who endured suffering on earth, taking up his cross and following Thee, his Master and God. Through his supplications, O Christ God, save Thou our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

O all-glorious wonder! walking the earth in a body of clay for Thy sake, O Lord, yet living like an incorporeal being, Andrew, Thy favorite, spurned the acquisition of possessions, desiring instead the things Thou hast promised, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man entered upon, which are prepared for those who love Thee. By his supplications save Thou our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Having been caught up to heaven, and heard ineffable words, thou didst behold things which were not visible; and thou didst see the image of the precious Cross, which thou didst venerate with love; and wast filled with divine sweetness: and the good things of paradise were revealed to thee. Yea, having followed after Christ, O holy and right wondrous Andrew, thou wast clothed in a robe woven of lightning.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

Of old, when the unblemished Ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and cried out, marvelling: “O my Child most sweet! What is this new and all-glorious sight? How hath the thankless assembly betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemned Thee to death, the Life of all? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”

Troparion, in Tone I —

Hearkening to the voice of Thine Apostle Paul saying: “We are fools for Christ’s sake”, Thy servant Andrew became a fool on earth for Thy sake, O Christ God. Wherefore, honoring his memory now, we entreat Thee, O Lord: Save Thou our souls!

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos; and the canon of the saint, with 4 troparia, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Open Thou my lips, move my tongue and direct my mind, O God, making me wise in all things, that I may praise Andrew, Thy favorite, who became a fool on earth for Thy sake.

O blessed Andrew, thou didst love Christ from thy childhood and didst desire Him with all thy soul. How can we praise thee as is due, who didst arm thyself against the devil and vanquish his wiles by the power of Christ?

Entreating God with supplications, reviling the devil, undaunted by his continual pounding on the door of thy little hut, thou didst remain unshaken in mind, made strong by the power of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Lady, Virgin Theotokos, cover us with thy wondrous omophorion, and protect thy city from misfortunes and sorrows; for the all-blessed Andrew beheld thee praying in the church of Blachernæ.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Wrestling with the dark foe, thou didst vanquish him, receiving boldness from Christ; and thou didst cause great grief for the demons, but gladness and joy for the holy angels, with whom thou now dost dwell.

In a dream thou didst behold Christ strengthening thee against the demons, bestowing a crown upon thee and teaching thee how to do battle with the dark foe. And now, as thou dost behold Him in the ineffable light of glory, pray thou for us.

Thou didst obey Christ, Who commanded thee to become a fool and promised thee the kingdom of heaven; and having followed Him, thou hast received His ineffable good things, O right wondrous Andrew.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, come thou now in glory to thy church with the councils of the saints, as the holy Andrew beheld thee, praying for Christians in luminous space; and grant us great mercy, O Lady.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Sitting in the church, bound with ropes and irons, O Andrew, thou didst experience great fear because of the demons, yet didst find John, the beloved apostle of Christ, to be thy helper, who commanded thee to endure all for Christ’s sake. As thou now makest thine abode with him, pray for us who honor thy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having fallen into greatly tangled perils from enemies visible and invisible, and been beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, O pure one, I flee to the haven of thy goodness as to my fervent help and protection; wherefore, O all-pure one, earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly praise thee, ever beseeching Him, O all-pure Theotokos, to grant remission of offenses unto those who fittingly hymn thy glory.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Thou didst see Christ the King seated upon His throne, and didst behold an image of this bitter life which is more bitter than wormwood; but afterwards thou didst receive a taste of the sweetness of incorruption.

On earth thou didst behold Christ in a dream and in ecstasy; but now, making thine abode with the incorporeal hosts, thou seest the unapproachable and ineffable glory of God. O Andrew, be thou mindful of us who honor thy memory.

O ye faithful, let us praise Andrew, who was persuaded by a vision of understanding and became a fool for Christ’s sake on earth, but now, through the grace of the Spirit, is most wise in the heavens, where he standeth with the angels before the God of all.

*Theotokion:* Who can recount the mystery of thy birthgiving? Or who could confess the power of thy supplication if thou didst not show thy precious protection to Andrew the fool of Christ in the church of Blachernæ?

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The life of Andrew was a marvel to all who beheld it: for he lay upon a dung-heap, went naked in the midst of the city, and rejected food. Yet all of this was for him the straight path to the kingdom of heaven.

All who beheld thine endurance marvelled; for the martyrs underwent suffering one time, but thou didst endure evil torments all the days of thy life, desiring to make thine abode in the kingdom of heaven; and having now obtained it, thou dost rejoice with never-ending joy.

Hidden things were revealed to thee, and thou didst behold the incorporeal ones as if they had flesh, for thou didst love nothing earthly. Wherefore, the gates of heaven have been opened to thee, and thou hast entered into the ineffable joy of thy Lord, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* The ranks of angels hymn thee, and the generations of men glorify thee; for thou, O Queen of heaven, didst appear to Andrew, covering with thine incorrupt veil the people present in thy church, who hymn thee who prayest unceasingly for them all.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

In thee, O father, were the words of the Apostle Paul fulfilled: The preaching of the Cross is to those who perish foolishness. Yet it was the power of God to thee who art saved, O most lauded Andrew.

In thee were the words of Christ fulfilled, Who said: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. For thou didst become poor in spirit, and hast received the kingdom of heaven.

Thou didst once guide the young Epiphanius to the straight path, and didst foretell that he would become a bishop and would teach the people; for thou didst perceive all the things of the future as though they were before thy very eyes.

*Theotokion:* We sinners fall down before thee, O Theotokos, that thou mayest spread thine invisible veil over us now and offer thy supplications to thy Son and God for us, as Andrew saw thee do of old.

Kontakion, in Tone IV —

Feigning foolishness of thine own will, thou didst hate the beauties of this world and didst cause the carnal thoughts to wither away through fasting and thirst, the heat of day and freezing cold, rain and snow; and unbowed by any of the vagaries of the weather, thou didst purify thyself like gold in a crucible, O blessed Andrew.

*Ikos:* Come, ye who love Christ! Come, ye who love the poor! Let us praise the blessed athlete, the all-wise Andrew, who became a fool for Christ’s sake, who, following the apostle, considered the world and all that is in it but dung, and diligently followed after Christ with haste, humbling his flesh with fasting, thirst and the burning heat of the day, with rain and snow, and the inclemency of the weather, keeping his soul free from the passions and rendering it radiant with the virtues, who with all the saints hath inherited the life of heaven eternally and prayeth to Christ God for those who with faith and love honor him. And let us cry out to him: Rejoice, O blessed Andrew, thou favorite of Christ!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Resolved to love nothing on earth more than the Creator, O blessed Andrew, wandering from church to church, thou didst rejoice, chanting: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The blessed Andrew did not spare his flesh, but gave it over to struggles and labors and the endurance of want. Wherefore, he manfully trampled the wiles of the demons underfoot, chanting: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst desire nought of earthly glory, but didst love Christ above all, O blessed Andrew, and didst hasten to Him, rejoicing, receiving reward for thy pangs and chanting continually: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O blessed Andrew, pray thou now to the Queen and Theotokos, whom thou didst behold praying for the world, that she cover us with her invincible mercy; for by her protection are all of us, the faithful, preserved.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst once behold a dead rich man escorted to the grave with visible honor, but invisibly dragged down by his wickedness into the depths of hell, O blessed Andrew, and thou didst weep and pray for him to the Lord.

O blessed Andrew, by thy grief thou didst prevail upon the incorporeal angel who grieved over the damnation of the soul of the rich man who had not repented in this life; and with him thou dost chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O blessed Andrew, thou didst behold an avaricious monk oppressed as by an evil serpent, and, delivering him from the sickness of greed, thou didst teach him to hymn and exalt the Lord supremely for all ages.

*Theotokion:* Learning of thy protection from the vision of Andrew, O Theotokos and Queen, we entreat thee earnestly: With thy mercy cover us who hymn thy Son and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Heeding the words of Christ, thou didst pray for those who beat thee, O holy one; wherefore, the gates of heaven opened, and thou didst behold the souls of the righteous flying forth in the guise of swallows. And with them thou now makest thine abode, O blessed Andrew.

Truly loving Christ, thou didst deny thyself and follow Him, for He said: Whosoever will save his life shall lose it. Wherefore, thou didst preserve thy soul in everlasting life, O right laudable and holy Andrew.

Great and all-glorious things have now found their fulfillment in thee in the kingdom of heaven, O right laudable one, for to the world thou wast a fool, but thou wast shown to be wise in Christ. Look down from the vault of heaven upon us who honor thy memory.

*Theotokion:* Every mortal is covered by thy protection, O all-glorious Theotokos, our helper, for the blessed Andrew beheld thee praying for the world to the uncreated Being Who was clothed by thee in a created nature.

