The 4th Day Of The MONTH OF OCTOBER

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Hierotheus,

Bishop Of Athens

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Paul the Simple\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Receiving the grace of the most holy Spirit, O most glorious Hierotheus, thou hast now traversed all the earth, teaching men to worship the Unity in three Hypostases: the unoriginate Father, the Source of the Godhead, and with Him the Son Who is equally enthroned and consubstantial with the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and became a man bearing flesh.

As one pleasing to God thou didst offer up thy soul as a sacred and divine gift, and didst commit thy sacred body as a thing divine, which halloweth the souls of those who believe in God Almighty, and which poureth forth salvation upon the faithful. Wherefore, we bless thy memory and burial, we love thy miracles and proclaim thy words.

Thou didst behold the twelve apostles at the dormition of the all-glorious Ever-virgin, the all-pure Theotokos, the Mother of the Lord, and with thee was Dionysius, who described the hierarchies. With them we, the faithful, bless thy most festive and all-holy solemnity, O glorious Hierotheus.

Glory…, in Tone II —

When thou wast present at the divine dormition of the Mother of God, O blessed herald of God, thou didst gladden the hearts of the faithful with divine proclamations, delighting the sacred company of the apostles, the preachers of God, and hymning the mysteries of God with divine ecstasy. Wherefore, having received boldness before Christ, O hierarch Hierotheus, pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

When the unblemished Ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb willingly led as a man to the slaughter, weeping, she said: “Dost Thou hasten now to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? What is this Thou hast done, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine exceeding great goodness, which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Having learned goodness and been watchful in all things, arrayed, as befitteth a priest, in a good conscience, thou didst draw forth ineffable things from the chosen vessel; and, having kept the Faith, thou didst complete a course like unto his. O hieromartyr Hierotheus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos; and the canon of the saint, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “We honor thy luminous memory, O most blessed one”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Having Paul, the disciple of the Master of the mysteries of heaven, the fisher of the world, as thy teacher, O God-pleaser, thou becamest a student of the highest vision.

The tongue of Paul, manifestly moved by the Spirit to declare the mysteries of God, embraced thee, O blessed one, making thee a divine herald.

Pierced through by the love of the Spirit, and conversing with the Master in mind with divine words, O most sacred one, thou didst set down sacred discourses.

*Theotokion:* As thou wast a receptacle of the eternal Light of divine magnificence, O pure Virgin Mistress, remove from me the defilement and stain of every sin.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Having assembled with gladness, we all honor thee as a sacred recorder of hallowed words, proclaiming the word of piety, and we glorify thy sacred memory.

Reaching out to the Master of all with might and main and love divine, O all-blessed one, thou didst illumine thy mind with His radiance and didst enlighten thy soul.

True to thy name, thou didst show thyself to be a sacred, godly, holy and divinely wise offering to the Almighty Creator of the ages, and thou hast adorned the Church of heaven.

*Theotokion:* He Who stretched out the heavens and holdeth together the circle of the earth was held in the flesh by thine arms in the fullness of His divine nature and hath shown thee to be the confirmation of all the faithful.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the chosen leader…” —

Taught by thee things strange and ineffable, we praise thee, the hierarch of Athens; for thou hast been shown to be a God-pleasing composer of hymns. Pray thou, O most blessed Hierotheus, that we be delivered from every sinful fall, that we may cry out: Rejoice, O divinely wise father!

Sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…” —

Having instructed thy mind with the words of the apostles and shepherded the assemblies of the faithful, O venerable, thou didst offer thyself as a pure sacrifice to the King and Creator Who became incarnate for us of the Virgin Theotokos, O Hierotheus, and didst confess His resurrection in glory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and unashamed hope, ­rampart, protection and refuge of those who have recourse to thee: With the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and great mercy to the world.

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee hanging of Thine own will upon the Cross between the thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother said, her womb rent with pain: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou hast been unjustly nailed to the Cross like a malefactor, since thou desirest to bring life to the human race, in that thou art compassionate?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

With godly words of oratory thou didst adorn the choirs of the faithful and didst gladden the sacred assembly of the apostles, O divinely wise Hierotheus, working with divine wonder and chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou didst dedicate thyself to God wholly and in every way, O blessed one, approaching Him in the sacred discourses of theology, as a divine hymnographer manifest in sanctity and a wise herald of God, O thou who pleased God in manifest sanctity, being sensibly chosen for those present.

Now most clearly beholding things divine, more sacred than all transitory indistinct images and shadows on the earth, and the most true divine vision of effulgence, O father, pray thou, that they be saved who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure and most blessed one, who art adorned with the splendors of virginity, thou gavest birth to the infinite God Who became finite within thy womb. Wherefore, we all truly praise thee, the Theotokos, and glorify thy birthgiving.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

In that thou dwellest together with the assembly of the angels, O father, with them thou didst stand at the divine dormition of her who gave birth to the Bestower of life for us, the all-holy and pure Mother of God, O divinely eloquent one.

Having as an elder supernaturally understood the visions of the Word, O most blessed one, thou didst confess Him to all who with faith accepted His effulgence and thy visionary theology, that they who love most valiantly might understand them.

Luminous with beams most rich, with supernatural effulgence and the assurance of divine revelations, in purity thou didst undergo many transitory trials, and through vision didst learn divine things most wise.

*Theotokion:* Without knowing man, O Virgin Maiden, through thy virginal blood thou didst conceive the Word Who is infinite in the essence of His divinity and became a man for the sake of us men, taking form in manner transcending recounting, law and nature.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Having mastered divine knowledge through godly study, O father, thou hast manifestly left thy discourses as secondary words of sacred knowledge, illumining our souls.

Truly blessed wast thou in thy purified soul, O divinely blessed Hierotheus, and thou didst love blessedness, thy one desire, and the beauties of the Savior.

Gazing upon the all-pure rays of divine splendor shining with noetic brilliance, O God-pleasing and blessed one, thou wast shown to share in their delight and radiance.

*Theotokion:* In true and lordly manner we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou didst ineffably give birth to God, Who united Himself to the flesh hypostatically, O all-holy Mother and Virgin.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

In that thou wast an unshakable pillar, O Hierotheus, thou wast not afraid of the threats of the enemy, but, hurled like a precious stone, didst destroy the fortress of falsehood, O father. Wherefore, with His life-giving and divine right hand the Master crowneth thee who hadst battled well. Him do thou entreat in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Submitting to Thy law, O Christ, Thy disciples, proclaiming the word of Thy divine coming to all the nations, ordained for all the Churches faithful pastors and preachers. Wherefore, Thou didst ordain also this pastor, whom Thou didst choose from infancy; and having enlightened him for Thee as one blameless, appointed him for this and assigned to him Thy flock, thou didst reveal him who prayeth for us all as a witness to Thy kingdom.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Through purity of life thou didst strive to see the holy of holies, O divinely blessed one, and didst wisely acquire the highest vision of God; and, chanting, thou didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The sound of thy words and the eloquence of thy writings gladden those who honor thee with love, and instruct them in hymnody, teaching them to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst bless the unity of the Godhead which is known as a Trinity of Persons and is hymned in three Hypostases, O divinely wise one; and, chanting, thou didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Transcending the laws of nature, O pure Virgin Mother, thou gavest birth to Him Who hath dominion over all things, visible and noetic, Whom we chant together, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The almighty activity of the Holy Spirit, making its abode within thy most pure soul, showed thee to be a God-pleasing preacher and divine herald hymning the Deliverer in sanctity and praising Him with faith: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having examined the ineffable structures of the mysteries of Christ with pious inquiry, thou didst clearly elucidate them with thy high eloquence and the most sweet composition of thy proclamations, crying out unceasingly: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The grace which is most rich filled thee with most divine inspiration and theology; wherefore thou hast poured forth doctrines like rivers, gladdening the choirs of the apostles, with whom thou now dost chant: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one who supernaturally gavest birth to God, Who is able to give life to all things, raise up my soul, which hath been slain by sins and hath been harmed by the venomous sting of the serpent, yet crieth out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

As a lover of all-wise wisdom, thou hast now received, rejoicing, the magnificent crown of grace therefrom; and as thou art a member of the heavenly choir which danceth before the Creator of all, pray thou, that those who praise thee may be saved from misfortunes, O Hierotheus.

Thou hast made thine abode in the divine courts on high and hast inherited the everlasting mansions, and now thou holdest festival with the armies of the angels and the ranks of the apostles, with whom thou rejoicest in gladness. And, dwelling together with them, ask divine peace for those who honor thee with faith.

Receiving excellent rewards, thou didst acquire their manifestation on earth, gazing toward God with constant love, O father Hierotheus. Pray thou earnestly now that He grant mercy and cleansing unto those who with faith celebrate thy radiant and most sacred memory.

*Theotokion:* As the Mother of the Creator of all, with thy maternal boldness beseech thy Son, that He save thy captive servants from the violence of tyrants, set at nought the slanders of wicked men and grant peace and salvation unto those who hymn thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

Thou didst make that which is baser subject to that which is more sublime, O God-pleaser, most wisely setting thy mind to control the passions. Wherefore, O Hierotheus, thou wast an instrument of theology and an apostle of Christ. O wise hierarch, pray thou for the world.

Theotokion —

Arriving at thine all-pure dormition with the rest of the apostles, Hierotheus chanted a hymn to thee, the Maiden, divinely beholding in ecstasy what is strange and ineffable, in that He is truly pleasing to God. O Virgin Mother of God, show us also to be emulators of him.

