Also on The 5th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of the Holy Hierarchs

Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon

Metropolitans of Moscow & Wonderworkers of All Russia

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O most honored fathers and holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, grant light to the blind, healing to the sick, and the ability to walk to the lame, hearkening mercifully to those who come with faith to your temple and entreat you for aid; for all of us, the faithful, have acquired you as helpers, intercessors and protectors. *Twice*

O all-blessed fathers and holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, mounting the virtues as a chariot ye made haste to God, bearing trophies of victory, and have left your bodies in their tombs as a mantle for us, O holy hierarchs, to pour forth healings and drive away the evil spirits. Wherefore, we call you blessed, O all-lauded ones.

Ye have been admitted to the choirs of the holy hierarchs, having adorned yourselves with a life of fasting, O Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon; and, rejoicing, ye now dwell in the heavens, where ye stand before Christ, joining chorus with the angels, deified by light divine. Be ye ever mindful of those who on earth call you blessed and keep your all-honored festival.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

The memory of the holy hierarchs of Christ hath shone forth like the sun, illumining the hearts of the faithful with understanding; and splendidly celebrating it today, we cry out in supplication: Rejoice, O pastors and teachers of the Christian people of the land of Russia! Rejoice, adornment of the Church, ornament of hierarchs and boast of monks! O Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, ye holy hierarchs of Christ, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved!

Now & ever…: Theotokion in the same tone —

No one who hath recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…” —

Through the operation of grace Peter hath been revealed as a spiritual habitation. Wherefore, ­assembling now, we hymn him.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

O holy Alexis, boast of hierarchs, glory of priests and standard for monastics: Rejoice, thou confirmation of the Church!

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

The dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit didst thou become by grace, filled with divine teachings; and therewith thou dost water the world, O Philip most wise.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! Rejoice, boast of the whole world! Rejoice, O pure and blessed Mother of God!

Troparion, in Tone IV —

O primates of Russia, true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon: Entreat the Master of all, that He grant peace to the whole world and great mercy to our souls.

At Great Vespers

After the chanting of the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the Man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one mighty among the martyrs…” —

Set like most radiant stars, O all-lauded and most honored ones, ye have adorned the world and illumine it with your beams. With the dogmas of the right Faith ye dispel the darkness of heresy, O holy hierarchs. Pray ye that those who celebrate your most honored memory with faith may be delivered from corruption and misfortunes.

Having illumined the whole world with spiritual splendors, ye were shown to be radiant suns, reaching all the ends of the earth with God’s commandments, as with rays; and ye enlighten the hearts of the faithful, O thrice-blessed God-bearers, dispelling the darkness of heresies by the power of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin.

O preachers equal to the apostles, holy hierarchs one in wisdom, fellow strugglers with the ascetics, chosen pastors, compassionate bestowers of mercy, primates of Russia: we praise you as is meet, O holy hierarchs, conversers with the angels, who pray for our souls.

And these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

O most sacred and God-bearing saints, who were truly shown to be of divine anointing, invested with the Holy Spirit, who ever enter with splendor into the holy of holies, O glorious ones, and learn there the mysteries of salvation: As sacred primates of Russia, pray ye with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Your life hath shone forth with the brilliance of the virtues, and ye have illumined the faithful, stilled the tempest of deception, and have truly been shown to be radiant suns, O most blessed and sacred leaders; and ye dwell where shineth the never-waning Light, having become children of the day by the grace of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, we celebrate your divine memory and splendid festival, and in gladness call you blessed.

O most wise primates Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon: Made brilliant with spiritual radiance, ye have destroyed all the night of heresies, have illumined the thoughts of all the faithful by grace, O glorious ones, and taught them to glorify the uncreated Trinity. Wherefore, joyously celebrating your splendid festival, we pray: Unceasingly entreat Christ, the all-good God, in behalf of our souls, O most lauded ones!

Glory…, in Tone VI —

O men of God and faithful servants, ministers of the Lord, men of divine desires, chosen vessels, pillars and confirmation of the Church, heirs to the kingdom: Cease ye never to cry out for us to the Lord.

Now & ever…: Dogmaticon, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son, Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the righteous man calleth forth praises, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who findeth wisdom, and the man who getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than costly stones; everything that is honored cannot be compared to her. Length of days and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Out of her mouth truth proceedeth, and law and mercy she carrieth on her tongue. Hear me, then, O children, for I will speak of excellent things; and happy is the man who will keep unto my ways, for my paths are the paths of life, and the desire is fashioned of the Lord. Wherefore, I entreat you and put forth my voice before the sons of men, for I with wisdom set up everything; I have called forth counsel, understanding and knowledge. Counsel is mine and sound wisdom, mine is understanding and strength is mine. I love those who love me, and those who seek me shall find grace. Understand, then, O ye simple, the cunning, and ye uninstructed — direct your hearts unto it. Hearken unto me again, for I will speak of honorable things, and the opening of my mouth shall be right things, for my mouth shall speak truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. They are all plain to him who understandeth, and right to those who find knowledge. For I will teach you the truth, so that your hope may be in the Lord and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; the lips of wise men know grace. The mouth of wise men meditateth wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them from death. At the death of a just man, his hope doth not perish. A righteous son is born for life; and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. The righteous always have light, and with the Lord they find grace and glory. The tongue of the wise knoweth what is good; there is wisdom in the good heart of a man. The Lord loveth holy hearts, and pleasing to Him are all the undefiled in the way. The wisdom of the Lord enlighteneth the countenance of the prudent; for she overtaketh those who desire her, in making herself first known unto them, and is easily seen of those who love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and showeth herself favorably to them in the ways. Vice shall not prevail against wisdom. For this cause was I a lover of her beauty; and I loved her, and sought her out from my youth. I desired to make her my bride, for the Master of all Himself loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a discloser of His works. Her labors are virtues: for she teacheth chastity and prudence, justice and fortitude, which are such things, as men can have nothing more profitable in their life. If a man desireth much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come. She knoweth subtleties of speech, and can expound obscure dreams; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and times. She is a good ally unto all, for immortality is in her, and in communing with her in speech, a good report. Wherefore, I spake with the Lord, and besought Him, and with my whole heart I said: O God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast created all things by Thy word, and fashioned man by Thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and righteousness: Give me wisdom which sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. O, send her from the heavens, out of Thy holy habitation, and from the throne of Thy glory, that, being with me, she may teach me what is well-pleasing in Thy sight, may guide me to understanding and preserve me in her glory. For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and their ponderings sinful.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

When the righteous is praised, the people are glad; for his memorial is immortality, because it is known unto God, and to men. For his soul pleased the Lord. Love ye wisdom, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love, and the keeping of her laws. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide the mysteries of God from you. For He is the guide to wisdom and the Director of the wise, and the Artisan of all understanding and craft. In her is a Spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of light everlasting and the image of the goodness of God. Friends of God and prophets doth she make. She is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order of stars: being compared with the light, she is found before it. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and hath guided them in right paths. She hath given them knowledge of holy things; she hath kept them safe from those who lay in wait, and hath given them a mighty contest, that all may know that godliness is stronger than all. Vice shall never prevail against wisdom, nor shall judgment omit to denounce the wicked. For the ungodly said, reasoning within themselves, but not aright: “Let us oppress the righteous man and take no pity on his holiness; neither let us spare the ancient gray hairs of the aged. For let our strength be the law of justice. Let us therefore lie in wait for the righteous, because he is displeasing unto us and is clear contrary to our doings. He upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth us for our offenses against our upbringing. He professeth to have knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of God. He is for us a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous for us even to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, and his ways are of another fashion. We are held by him to be an object of mockery; he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness; he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; and let us prove what shall happen in the end of him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and test his guilelessness. Let us condemn him to a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited.” Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them, and they comprehended not the mysteries of God, neither understood they that Thou alone art God, Who hast authority over life and death, Who savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil, Who art compassionate and merciful, and bestowest grace upon Thy saints, and Who dost oppose the prideful with Thine own arm.

At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone II —

Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and let us clap our hands to psalms, chanting hymns to the consolers of the grieving, the fervent intercessors for all in every place, who pray to the Lord for sinners: the holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, the boast of the land of Russia, the adornment of all the priesthood, who are truly rivers of mercy, the lovers of the divine humility of Christ Who hath granted great mercy to the world.

As ye possess boldness before the Lord, O most sacred and holy hierarchs and pastors, ye confirmation of the faithful, pray that those who with love celebrate your most honored memory may be delivered from every evil circumstance and from foreign invasion, through your supplications to the Master.

O beacons of knowledge for the Church, emulators of the Trinity, primates of Russia, who have driven back the gloom of deception and illumined the world with the light of Orthodoxy: Ye have been counted worthy to become partakers of divine glory. Pray ye unceasingly to Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone V —

With the clarion let us sound forth hymns! Let us leap up in festivity and join chorus, rejoicing, for the feast of supplication to the wise hierarchs. Let kings and princes come together and clap their hands in hymnody to the luminaries of the Church of Christ. Ye pastors and teachers of the Good Shepherd, assembling, let us praise the wise initiates of the mysteries of God, the luminous beacons, the radiant lamps, the pillars of the Church, the mighty foundations of the Faith, the swallows heralding the divine spring of salvation, the trumpets sounding forth in music, uttering praise in divine hymns! And let us say: O holy wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, go ye quickly before us, and deliver us from foreign invasion and civil strife; and save your flock by your supplications.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

With the clarion let us sound forth in hymns; for the Virgin Mother, the Queen of all, bending down from the heavens, with blessings crowneth those who hymn her. Let kings and princes come together and clap their hands in songs to the Queen who gave birth to the King Whose good pleasure it hath been, in His love for mankind, to loose those who from of old were held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let us praise the all-pure Mother of the Good Shepherd, the golden candlestand, the radiant cloud more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which held the Manna, the portal of the Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians. And, rendering praise in godly hymns, let us say: O palace of the Word, count us, the lowly, to be worthy of the kingdom of heaven; for there is nought which is impossible for thy mediation.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II —

With what beauteous hymns shall we laud the holy hierarchs of Christ, the most splendid preachers of the Gospel, the preservers of the Church and helpers of the land of Russia, who guide us to the light of the knowledge of God, the allies of faithful Orthodox rulers? By their supplications may Christ, Who hath great mercy, lay low the arrogance of the enemy.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

With what vigilant mouths shall we praise the divinely wise hierarchs, the splendid adornment of the Church of Christ, the crowns of the priesthood, the rule of piety, the divine wellsprings of inexhaustible healings, the outpouring of spiritual gifts, the rivers of many miracles which gladden the land of Russia by their flow: Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, the allies of all faithful Orthodox rulers? By their supplications may Christ, Who hath great mercy, lay low the arrogance of the enemy.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

With what embellished voices shall we hymn the holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, wondrous in miracles, who were hallowed from their earliest childhood, the immovable pillars of the Church, who dwell together with the incorporeal hosts, the restoration of justice, the helpers of the oppressed, the physicians who heal the ailing without fee? By their supplications hath Christ granted unity, peace and great mercy to the Churches.

Glory…, in Tone III —

O most honored and holy hierarchs, all-blessed fathers and wonderworkers, favored ones of Christ, primates of Russia, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, who shone forth in the prophetic life: unceasingly ministering to the Savior with the angels, ye have been vouchsafed the gifts of the apostles. Pray ye, that we be delivered from every transgression, that Christ grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Through the divine Spirit, by the will of the Father, without seed thou didst conceive the Son of God Who hath existed without mother from before the ages, and for our sake thou gavest birth in the flesh unto Him Who came forth from thee without father; and thou didst nurture Him on milk as a babe. Wherefore, cease not to pray, that our souls be delivered from tribulations.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

O primates of Russia, true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon: Entreat the Master of all, that He grant peace to the whole world and great mercy to our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saints, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…” —

Let us praise the holy hierarchs of the Lord as the royal adornment of the Church, a treasury of Traditions which cannot be taken away; for thereby they have instructed us to honor the Holy Trinity Who is One in Essence, but separate as to hypostases. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, have mercy on us who with faith have recourse to thee, who art full of loving-kindness, and who ask thy fervent aid; for, as thou art good, and the Mother of God Most High, thou art able to save all by thy maternal supplications, ever embracing us, O thou who art full of divine joy.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Pillars of the Church and a wealth of piety which cannot be stolen were ye, O divinely eloquent and holy hierarchs, and ye illumined your life with dispassion and made clear the teachings and commandments of the Trinity. O venerable fathers, entreat Christ God in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The one Lord, without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took human form in thy womb, became God incarnate, preserving thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate after giving birth as thou wast before. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy.

Polyeleos, and this Magnification —

We magnify you, O holy hierarchs of Christ Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, and we honor your holy memory; for ye entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm Verses —

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Let the all-wise teachers of the whole world, who on earth have glorified God in word and deed, be magnified today as bestowers of salvation upon us all. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Theotokos, unassailable intercessor, who art ready to help with supplication those who have recourse unto thee: Deliver me from tribulations, and disdain me not, O help of all.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord

Gospel according to John, § 36 \(Jn. 10: 9-16\)

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

Divine grace overshadoweth the most precious shrines of your relics, O all-blessed ones. Wherefore, hastening to the scent of the myrrh of your miracles, we draw forth healings for the infirm. O holy hierarchs of Christ Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, entreat Christ in behalf of our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \(the Paraclisis\), with 6 troparia, including its irmos, in Tone VIII. And the following canon of the holy hierarchs, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Beset by many perils, we flee to you to obtain salvation, O great and holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon. Save us from cruel necessity and tribulations!

Assaults of the passions and many griefs and tribulations are destroying my soul. Bring peace to it, O holy hierarchs, by your supplications to God, and turn it from sorrow to joy.

Entreat Christ the Savior, O great and chosen wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, that we may be delivered from trials, griefs and barbarian invasion by your supplications.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God and Mistress, vouchsafe unto us, who are in sorrow and pain, the divine visitation and providence which are from thee.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

After God ye have been the helpers and protectors of Moscow, O favorites of God. Guide us to the haven of salvation; for ye are a wall of defense for the faithful.

We entreat you, O holy wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon: dispel our spiritual turmoil and the tempest of grief, and grant us serenity by your supplications of God.

As ye were right noble emulators of the good, and have been enriched by God with miracles, render help unto all, praying to God Who glorifieth you, His favored ones.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, help us who experience the trials in cruel infirmities and the sore distress of barbarian invasions; and transform our grief into joy.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

O holy fathers, to the Master of all stretch forth your hands wherewith ye labored well, and pleased God, and gave abundantly to those in need; and open your lips for prayer, wherewith ye glorified God and instructed the people in divine knowledge. Haste ye, therefore, to our aid, and by your supplications to God deliver us from the tribulations and evils which assail us, and from all necessity. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O most immaculate Virgin, who gavest birth to the transcendent God, with the holy hierarchs unceasingly entreat Him, that before the end He grant remission of transgressions and correction of life to us who with faith and love hymn thee as is meet, O thou who alone art most lauded.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Beseech God in your supplications, O holy fathers, that He still the turmoil of my passions and the tempest of the assaults of my many tribulations.

O holy fathers, extend the abyss of your loving-kindness unto us who call upon you for help, for the merciful God hearkeneth to your supplications.

Having you as our hope, O holy fathers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, and your supplications to God as an immovable rampart, we are delivered from evils and all misfortunes.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou our spiritual infirmities and our bodily sufferings, O pure one. Yea, haste thou, O Lady, to bestow health upon us by thy supplications.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Fill our life with gladness, O holy fathers, delivering us from the invasion of barbarians and from civil strife.

Deliver us from tribulations, O holy wonderworkers, for ye are fervent intercessors who pray for our souls.

Dispel the gloom of my transgressions and mine unseemly acts by your prayers to God.

*Theotokion:* We have acquired thee, O Mistress, as an indestructible bulwark and haven, the perfect salvation of our souls, and a open space amid tribulations. Save us now from our passions and tribulations.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Deliver your city from death, corruption and captivity to barbarians, and preserve it from fiery conflagration by your supplications unto God.

We know you to be the helpers and steadfast preservers of our city, O holy hierarchs of the Lord; wherefore, fleeing unto you, we receive mercy and are delivered from tribulations.

We have acquired you as a rampart and a haven, O holy wonderworkers, a wide place amid our sorrows, the confirmation and salvation of our souls.

*Theotokion:* I know thee to be the mediatress of life and our steadfast preserver, O Virgin, who dost disperse the riot of temptations and fendest off the assaults of the demons. And I ever entreat thee to deliver me from the passions, O most immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Piously did ye live among holy hierarchs; and ye guided the people toward divine knowledge, and were well pleasing unto God. Wherefore, ye have been glorified by Him with incorruption and miracles, as disciples of the grace of God.

*Ikos:* O primates of Russia, who sat in the place of the first-called apostle, great luminaries Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, emulators of the Trinity, instructors in Orthodoxy: Ye lived in the world and enlightened the universe with your teaching. Wherefore, ye have become heirs to the kingdom of heaven and have been glorified with incorruption and miracles, as disciples of the grace of God.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As Thou didst desire to arrange our salvation, O Savior, with miracles Thou dost glorify Thy favored ones who cry out to Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Him Whose will is mercy, to Whom the Virgin Mother gave birth, entreat ye, O holy hierarchs of Christ Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, that from our transgressions, from misfortunes and evils, He deliver us who cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

A treasury of salvation and a wellspring of healing were ye, O favorites of God, and instructors in repentance for those who cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast shown forth her who gave birth unto Thee as a treasury of salvation and a wellspring of incorruption, a tower of confirmation and portal of repentance for those who cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

O holy fathers and instructors in Orthodoxy, disdain not those who are in need of your aid, who hymn and exalt Christ supremely forever.

Heal the impotence of our souls, and from ailments of the body raise up those who cry out and exalt Christ supremely forever.

A wealth of healings do ye pour forth upon those who have recourse to you, the favorites of God, and who with faith hymn and exalt Christ supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* Thou dost drive away assaults of temptations and the incursions of the passions, O Virgin, that we may hymn and exalt thee, the pure one, supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Spurn not the torrents of our tears, we entreat you, O holy fathers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, and grant consolation unto all who call you blessed.

Fill our hearts with joy through your prayers unto God, O holy fathers and fervent helpers.

O all-radiant luminaries, emulators of the Trinity, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, by your labors and struggles hath the gloom of ignorance been driven far from us who right faithfully call you blessed.

*Theotokion:* With the rays of thy light illumine those who right faithfully confess thee to be the Theotokos, O Virgin, dispelling the gloom of ignorance and saving us from grievous misfortunes.

Exapostilarion —

Let us praise the God-bearing fathers, who are radiant beacons brighter than the rays of the sun, supernaturally united with the Trinity, the Origin of light, the three-Sunned Unity. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

With unceasing hymns do we call thee blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, who received One of the Trinity in thy womb and bore the transcendent Word in thy divine arms, without change or alteration.

On the Praises, 6 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

Possessed of a merciful soul, a pure mind, a heart untroubled, a blameless faith, love unfeigned, excellent doctrine and the hierarchal dignity, thou hast now been admitted to the choirs of holy hierarchs in the heavens. Wherefore, we honor thee, O holy hierarch Peter, and with sacred hymns we all piously call thee blessed. *Twice*

O most honored father, right wondrous and all-wise Alexis, thou didst please God in the monastic life. Thee did God choose first from thy youth as a pastor and great teacher for the reason-endowed sheep. Thou wast shown to be an instructor of priests and an all-radiant star for all the land of Russia, illumining with miracles all who with faith fall down before the shrine of thy relics. Wherefore, the choir of primates hath received thee. With them offer up supplication, entreating remission of sins for thy flock.

O father Jonah, divinely wise hierarch, having loved Christ from childhood thou didst cleave unto His love; and having through Him illumined thy heart with the divine rays of the All-holy Spirit, thou didst truly become radiant of countenance. Wherefore, grant thou those petitions which conduce to salvation to those who have recourse to thy temple, and entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Thou didst finish the race and keep the faith, O blessed and holy hierarch Philip; for which cause Christ hath crowned thee with a splendid crown of righteousness and adorned thy confession, O right wondrous one. Wherefore, having received a heavenly inheritance, beseech the Savior in behalf of those who hymn thy memory.

O all-honored and right wondrous fathers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip, Hermogenes & Tikhon, who increased the talent entrusted to you, ye have been counted worthy of the joy of your Lord; and stand now with the choirs of the holy hierarchs, adorned with the grace of divine splendor. Wherefore, with faith and love we praise your most radiant memory, magnifying Christ Who hath glorified His favored ones.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

O good and faithful servants, good husbandmen of the vineyard of Christ, ye bore the burden of the day, increasing the talent given you, and did not envy those who came after you. Wherefore, the gate of heaven hath been opened unto you. Enter ye into the joy of Christ the Master, praying in our behalf, O holy teachers.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We beseech thee, O Mistress, with all the saints and the apostles: Entreat Him to have mercy on our souls!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the holy hierarchs.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, §335 \(Heb. 13: 17-21\)

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as those who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone II —

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* Let us go forth into His tabernacles, let us worship at the place where His feet have stood.

Gospel according to Matthew, §11

\(Mt. 5: 14-19\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you: Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

Communion Verse —

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

