The 6th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of the Holy and Glorious Apostle Thomas

At Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...” —

O most blessed one, when thou didst touch the side of the Master thou didst grasp the most excellent of good things, for like a sponge thou didst soak up waters therefrom, the wellspring of blessings and life eternal, and didst moisten hearts dried up through unbelief, pouring forth the dogmas of the divine knowledge of God. *Thrice*

By thy faithful disbelief thou didst assure the faithful, having begun to say of God, that He is the God and Lord of all creation, Who took flesh for the sake of us on earth, and endured the Cross and death, the print of the nails, and the piercing of His side with a spear, from whence we draw forth life. *Thrice*

The wondrous Thomas hath disclosed the wellspring of dogmas unto the divinely wise, O Master; for, when he touched Thy side and was taught Thy twofold energies through Thy two Natures, he rightly cried aloud: Thou art my God and Master! Thou art the Lord of glory, Who didst become flesh for my sake! *Twice*

Glory..., the composition of the Studite, in Tone VI —

As a servant of the Word and of His ineffable incarnation, thou didst draw forth an abyss of wisdom, O Apostle Thomas; for, luring souls from the depths of deception, thou didst draw them up with the pole of the Cross. Hence, with the net of thy dogmas, thou didst bring the whole world to enlightenment and didst illumine the souls of the benighted Indians with the light of knowledge. Wherefore, radiantly delighting in the glories of Christ, entreat Him to have mercy on our souls.

Now & ever..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three lessons:

Reading from the First Epistle General of John \(1:1-7\).

That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; \(For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;\) that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. This then is the message which we have heard of Him, and declare unto you: that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.

Reading from the General Epistle of James \(1:1-12\).

James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations; Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: But the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.

Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \(1:1-7, 17-25\).

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not. And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

If the superior wisheth to chant the Litia, we first sing the sticheron of the temple, and then these stichera of the Apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...” —

With the rod of grace didst thou pull men up from the depths of vainglory, O right wondrous Thomas, obedient to the command of the Master, Who enlighteneth thy mind wholly, and hath shown thee to be an apostle, an honored and divine proclaimer of His unapproachable divinity, O all-blessed one.

The radiance of the Spirit descended upon thee in the guise of fire, O blessed one, and made a divine refuge of thee who dost quickly drive away the gloom of godlessness and enlightenest the world with the radiance of thy words most wise, O expounder of the mysteries, adornment of the apostles, blessed beholder of Christ.

Illumining those who sat in the darkness of ignorance with the lightning flashes of thy preaching, O glorious one, thou didst show them forth as children of our God and Master for the sake of their faith. His sufferings and death didst thou emulate, and thou wast an inheritor of glory, in that thou wast wise and divinely eloquent, a disciple of the Truth.

Glory..., in Tone II —

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ; and, signed with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou didst commit thy soul unto Christ, O Apostle Thomas, sent by Him to the nations that had fallen into perdition, that thou mightest turn men to the light of knowledge of God, having completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever..., Theotokion —

All of my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign...” —

Christ, Who loveth mankind, took thee like a pearl from the abyss of the turmoil of the world, enriching with thee the poor and those who are held fast by the poverty of grievous circumstances, O Apostle Thomas. Wherefore, we bless thee and glorify in praise thy most festive memorial, piously honoring thee.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Thou didst enlighten all the land of India, O most sacred apostle and seer of God; for, having illumined all, thou didst make them children of light and of the day of the Spirit, O wise one. And having cast down the temples of idols, thou didst through grace raise up churches to the glory and praise of God, O blessed intercessor for our souls.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Having probed with thy curious hand the divine side and the wounds of the nails which the Immortal One endured for our sake, and having joyously transformed thy disbelief into right belief, O Thomas, thou didst cry out: Thou art my God and Lord! I glorify Thee Who lovest mankind, and Who through Thy sufferings hast poured forth dispassion upon the faithful!

Glory..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI —

Beholding the divine wisdom of Christ, thou wast mystically shown to be a noetic bowl wherein the souls of the faithful find gladness, O Apostle Thomas; for, with the divine net of the Spirit thou didst draw men forth from the depths of wretchedness. Wherefore, thou didst emerge from Sion like a river of grace, pouring forth thy divine dogmas upon the whole world. Therefore, emulating the sufferings of Christ, thou wast pierced in thy side, entering the shade of incorruption. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever..., Theotokion —

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Beseech Him with the holy apostles, we pray thee, O Mistress, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Troparion, in Tone II —

Thou wast a disciple of Christ, a member of the divine assembly of the apostles, for thou didst prove the resurrection of Christ by thy disbelief and didst verify His all-pure Passion by thy touch, O all-praised Thomas. Ask that peace and great mercy may now be given us.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, O Theotokos; for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, thou art known to be a true Mother, having given birth unto God. Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion, twice; Glory..., Now & ever..., the resurrectional theotokion —

All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, O Theotokos; for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, thou art known to be a true Mother, having given birth unto God. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning...” —

With hymns let us all praise the memory of the apostle and disciple of Christ; for, having in godly manner touched the print of the nails and acquired true faith, he hath made our thoughts steadfast in the world and doth beseech the Savior that our souls find mercy. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O pure one, ever entreat the God and Lord, Who, for the sake of us who have become corrupt through transgressions, became incarnate of thee, that He take pity and turn away His anger and wrath from those who with faith unceasingly hymn thy greatness, O thou who art full of grace.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “O Thou Who wast lifted up...” —

Having touched the Savior’s side and drawn forth therefrom knowledge of God, O glorious apostle, by thy disbelief hast thou drawn those of earth unto the Faith as faithful; and having been pierced with spears throughout thy whole body, thou dost enlighten the souls of all who praise thy holy repose.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O unashamed hope of those who trust in thee! O thou who alone didst, in manner transcending nature, give birth in the flesh unto Christ our God: With the holy apostles entreat Him, that He grant to the world cleansing from their transgressions and to us all correction of life before the end.

After the polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III —

With the radiance of the Spirit of God thou didst destroy the darkness of polytheism and didst illumine the hearts of the faithful, chanting the commandments of salvation, O most wise Apostle Thomas. Beseech Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Every one who seeketh salvation rightly maketh haste unto a place where such is found. And what refuge that giveth shelter unto our souls have we other than thee, O Theotokos?

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Reading from the Gospel According to St. John § 67 \(21:15-25\).

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time, Lovest thou Me? And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He said unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who had also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, which is he who betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone IV —

Christ, the great Sun, doth emit thee upon India as a brilliant ray of light, O initiate of the mysteries, and thou dost quickly dispel the gloom of deception, O most wise Apostle Thomas, and dost enlighten the people to honor the divine Trinity, by Whom all are preserved.

Canon to the Theotokos \(the Paraclisis\), with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and the canon to the apostle, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I marvel at Thomas, who is full of wonders,” the composition of the venerable Theophanes, in Tone IV.

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

The Son of God, God the Word, Who is without beginning, appeared on earth in a form like unto ours, Him Whom thou didst behold, and Whose hands and side thou didst touch, O glorious one, do thou beseech, that He save thy flock.

Jesus, my God, Who knowest that which is hidden, Who trieth the reins and testeth hearts, chose thee to be a divine apostle and a minister and witness of His manifestation as God, O most blessed Thomas.

Thou wast shown to be a river of mystic waters watering the face of the earth and the assembly of the Church with streams of knowledge divine, O Thomas, and dispelling the delusion of polytheism with the din of the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* O all-hymned Theotokos, destroyer of death and corruption, thou didst give birth to Christ, the Source of incorruption, Who hath adorned human nature with the grace of immortality, O all-pure one.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Splendid in the excellence of virtue and miracles, O thou who didst thyself behold Christ, and having illumined the ugliness of the Indians with divine light, thou didst enlighten their benighted state with faith.

Ablaze with radiance through the activity of the Spirit Himself, thou wast launched like a bolt of divine light, O thou who wast pleasing unto God, and didst enlighten the world with miracles, O Thomas.

Instructed in the mysteries of the dogmas of divine wisdom, which surpasseth the swiftness of lightning, O Apostle Thomas, thou didst illumine the ends of the earth with light.

*Theotokion:* O thou who knewest not wedlock, who gavest birth unto God in the flesh. Make me steadfast who am shaken by the assaults of the passions, for I have no other helper save thee, O all-pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the wisdom...” —

Seining for reason-endowed fish with the net of divine words, thou didst offer them to our God as firstfruits; and, desiring to be arrayed in the wounds of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His suffering. Wherefore, assembling together, we honor thine all-festive memory as is meet, O glorious apostle, and with one accord we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, gavest birth ­without seed to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead made His abode within thee, and thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and men, cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Provided with a most magnificent manifestation of wonders, and radiantly propounding the glory of the divine dogmas, with thy preaching didst thou embrace the whole world, which crieth out: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

O blessed and most honored Thomas, we praise thee as one who himself beheld the Word, and who art an apostle and a fervent minister and witness to His glory and majesty.

Having set a foundation firmly upon the chief Cornerstone, O blessed and ever all-memorable one, thou didst build a bridal chamber and a heavenly tabernacle for those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* We call the all-holy Virgin the unploughed ground which put forth the Grain of life, the light cloud which let fall the Bestower of life as a shower, crying: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Ode V

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Radiant with the glory of Christ, O apostle, having touched the side of the Creator of life, thou didst draw forth an unfathomable abyss of theology and didst enrich the world.

O greatly Merciful One, Thomas, who had not been present at Thy first entrance, did not believe the disciples, but, believing later, he cried out, proclaiming Thee God and Lord, rejoicing.

Like an animate heaven Thomas proclaimed Thy glory with spiritual thunder, O Christ; and confessing Thee to be God and Lord, he announced the glad tidings to the faithful.

*Theotokion:* O all-undefiled one, show forth our mind to prevail over the passions, and put down the assaults of the thoughts thereof, O Bride of God, Who gavest birth unto God, the Savior of our souls.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

O blessed Thomas, thy disbelief doth heal the soul-destroying disbelief of all, for without doubt thou didst probe the wounds made by the nails and the spear.

O Christ, as Thou art powerful, Thou didst launch Thine apostle like a speeding arrow into the hearts of Thine enemies, and he hath brought them to Thee as spoils of war.

O Compassionate One, Thou didst abolish idolatrous sacrifices, being Thyself slain on a tree, and by the holy sacrifices of the divinely inspired apostles who emulated Thy sufferings.

*Theotokion:* O wonder more novel than all wonders! For conceiving in her womb, without knowing man, the Virgin did not confine Him Who holdeth all things.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Today hast Thou appeared...” —

Full of the grace of wisdom, the apostle and true servant of Christ cried out to Thee in repentance: “Thou art my Lord and God!”

*Ikos:* Peter cried out to the divinely eloquent Thomas, the disciple of the Lord and great initiate of the mysteries: “We have seen the Lord!” And his friend said to him and cried out: “Except I see the wounds of His hands, I will not believe.” Then the Master of all came as a servant, desiring to save all, and said to Thomas: “Touch thou My hands and side, and be not unbelieving; for I am thy Lord and God.” And he, in repentance, cried out: “Thou art my Lord and God!”

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

As an apostle, rejoicing, thou dost hold chorus with the choirs on high in the heavens, O blessed one, and thou dost chant in gladness: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

From one end of the earth to the other have thy proclamation and the utterance of thy divine words passed, teaching those who that cry: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou becamest a temple of the Trinity, O all-praised one; wherefore, thou didst demolish the temples and graven images of the idols, O apostle, and didst raise up temples to the glory and praise of Christ God.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving have we been delivered from slavery to the law, for thou, O Theotokos, without knowing man, didst for us give birth unto the Deliverer. Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Conversing with God incarnate, unmindful of the flesh, O blessed one, thou wast enriched with heavenly deification, rendered divine by thy closeness to God, and crying out: Hymn ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Uniting thyself to Christ with love, thou wast eager to die with Him, O blessed one, proclaiming to thy fellow apostles: “Come, let us accept death with Him, crying out: Hymn ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!”

O ye apostles, Christ hath shown you to be clouds full of the rain of His will, watering the Church with showers of divine knowledge, O most wise ones, and giving drink unto those who sing: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* O thou who art devoid of lusts and defilement, thou art the temple of the All-holy Word Who sanctifieth all things, and Who with the Father is equally without beginning. Wherefore, O Virgin, we hymn and supremely exalt thee forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a splendid chariot bearing the Word seated upon thy most comely and Godbearing soul, directing unto salvation those who hymn thee.

Celebrating thy most blessed memory, we pray that we may be delivered from every threefold wave by the boldness which thou hast as an apostle of Christ, O all-honored beholder of God.

This day do we all celebrate thy memory, O Apostle Thomas; sanctify and forgive us, delivering us by faith from all temptations, evil circumstances and passions through thy prayers.

*Theotokion:* From the ground of the Virgin hath God the Word, the comely Ear of grain, sprung forth, whereof tasting, O ye faithful, we live and are established in Him. Wherefore, thee, who gavest Him birth, do we magnify.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...” —

O apostle of the all-compassionate Christ, thou who thyself didst behold Him: Entreat Him to grant peace unto all the world, victory over heresy and schism unto Christ-loving hierarchs, and salvation and remission of transgressions unto those who praise thee as a divinely eloquent disciple, O Thomas.

Glory...: another Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

O glory of the apostles, like the most radiant sun of the east wast thou sent to the Indians, and thou didst illumine them with the light of thy words and by faith in the Trinity. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy and divine memory.

Now & ever..., Theotokion —

We, the faithful, bring before Thee as is meet Thine all-holy Mother as an intercessor and fervent helper, O Christ. Vouchsafe that Thy servants may share in Thy glory and the inheritance of the righteous and the food of paradise; and grant us the kingdom of heaven.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, the composition of Anatolius —

*In Tone I:* Thou didst follow after Christ, O apostle Thomas, and didst disdain the world. And laying up His teachings in thy treasury, thou wast shown to be an apostle. Wherefore, being amongst pagans, souls darkened by their delusion and passions didst thou illumine with the Savior’s commandments, that they might believe in the consubstantial Trinity. *Twice*

*In Tone IV:* Thou didst enlighten thy mind with the divine fire of the Master, as a lawful disciple, O apostle Thomas; for with the Cross as a rod thou didst draw the souls of the ungodly from the depths of ignorance. Wherefore, with the pole of the divine Spirit thou didst even fish for the darkened conscience of the Indians. Ever beseech Christ God, that we be delivered from the sight of the dark enemy, and that our souls may be saved.

Abandoning the depths which were fished, with faith thou didst hasten to take up the rod of the Cross, and therewith thou didst fish for men, O apostle Thomas. Wherefore, having touched the all-pure side of the Word, thou wast vouchsafed also to feel with thy finger the wounds of the nails’ entry. Ever earnestly entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI —

Thou wast shown to be like Elijah who rode a chariot, O Apostle Thomas, aflame with the fire of the divine Spirit, riding upon a chariot of the virtues; for, plumbing the depths of the sea of knowledge, thou didst catch men as fish, bringing them up from death to life. Wherefore, enlightening the souls of the faithful, with the staff of the Cross didst thou lead them up from deadly delusion unto life, and, standing before Christ with the bodiless ones, do thou ever earnestly beseech Him for the salvation of our souls.

Now & ever..., Theotokion —

No one who hath recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Odes III and VI of the Apostle’s canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Reading from the First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians §131 \(4:9-16\).

Brethren: God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of the saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Reading from the Gospel According to St. John §65 \(20:19-31\).

The same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said unto them: “Peace be unto you.” And when He had so said, He showed unto them His hands and His side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them again: “Peace be unto you: as My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you.” And when He had said this, He breathed on them, and said unto them: “Receive ye the Holy Spirit: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.” But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: “We have seen the Lord.” But he said unto them: “Except I shall see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into His side, I will not believe.” And after eight days again His disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said: “Peace be unto you.” Then said He to Thomas: “Reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side; and be not faithless, but believing.” And Thomas answered and said unto Him: “My Lord and my God.” Jesus said unto him: “Thomas, because thou hast seen Me, thou hast believed: blessed are those who have not seen, and yet have believed.” And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of His disciples, which are not written in this book: but these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through His name.

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

