The 9th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Apostle James,

The Son Of Alphæus

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Andronicus

& His Wife, Athanasia

At Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

As radiant as the sun thou didst shine forth, O apostle, with the beams of the Spirit, and hast illumined the whole world with divine knowledge, O blessed one, and driven away the darkness of polytheism with thy divine preaching. Wherefore, celebrating thine all-splendid and right laudable festival today, we glorify thee with piety. *Thrice*

Thou hast thundered forth sacred and saving doctrines upon the whole world, O all-wise one, hast cleansed all creation of the madness of idolatry, O divinely wise one, and hast enlightened the people with the radiance of the knowledge of God. And, demolishing the temples of the idols through grace, thou didst raise up churches for the praise of our God. *Thrice*

Seated in the heights of divine knowledge, O James, thou didst receive the grace of the Spirit, which appeared to thee in the guise of fire and manifestly consumed all the idolatrous filth of impiety with a tongue of flame. Wherefore, we praise thee as an apostle and herald of God, celebrating today thy holy festival. *Twice*

Glory…, the composition of Theophanes, idiomelon, in the same tone —

Manifestly receiving the grace of the divine Spirit, O James, thou wast numbered among the sacred choir of the apostles. Wherefore, by His descent from the heavens and His mighty inspiration, He illumined thee with a tongue of fire, and thou hast consumed the thorny ungodliness of the heathen. Entreat Christ God, O divine herald, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

The Prophet David, the forefather of God, for thy sake gave voice beforehand in psalmody concerning thee, unto Him Who in thee accomplished mighty works: the Queen stood at Thy right hand. For God Whose good pleasure it was to become incarnate of thee without father showed thee, His Mother, to be the mediatress of life, that He might renew His image which had become corrupt through the passions; and having found the sheep which had strayed among the mountains and become lost, He taketh it upon His shoulders and bringeth it to His Father; and Christ, Who is possessed of great and rich mercy, in accordance with His will, uniteth it with the hosts of heaven, and saveth the world, O Theotokos.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

Reading from the First Epistle General of John \(1:1-7\).

That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; \(For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;\) that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. This then is the message which we have heard of Him, and declare unto you: that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.

Reading from the General Epistle of James \(1:1-12\).

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not. And the angels who kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said: “The Lord rebuke thee.” But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness forever. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying: “Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all who are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be those who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto Him Who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

Reading from the General Epistle of Jude \(1:1-25\).

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not. And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Korah. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

With the rod of grace thou didst draw men from the depths of vanity, O right wondrous one, obedient, O James, to the behest of thy Teacher, Who enlightened thine understanding in all things and showed thee forth, O most blessed one, as an apostle and honored divine herald of His unapproachable divinity. *Twice*

The effulgence of the Spirit descended upon thee in the guise of fire, and made thee a divine receptacle, O blessed one, who quickly drivest away the darkness of ungodliness and dost illumine the world with the radiance of thy most wise words, O thou who givest utterance to mysteries, adornment of the apostles, O blessed witness of Christ.

Illumining those who sit in the darkness of ignorance with the lightning-flashes of thy preaching, O glorious one, thou didst show them to be children of God the Master because of their faith; and thou didst emulate His sufferings and death, and hast become an heir to His glory, in that thou art wise and divinely eloquent, a disciple most true.

Glory..., in Tone II —

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ; and, sealed with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou wast sent by Him to nations which were perishing, to convert men to the light of the knowledge of God, O Apostle James. And, finishing the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments, thou didst commit thy soul to Christ. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever..., Theotokion —

All of my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Thou hast received invincible authority and power over the demons, O apostle, to drive away their dark princes with the name of Christ. Thou hast passed over the earth, shedding light like the sun, and hast taught all the nations, O glorious one, preaching the first salvific coming of Christ.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Emulating the primal Goodness, the essential and all-divine Life, thou wast a good man in essence, O James, and wast called the son of divine grace, showing thyself to be an earnest disciple of Christ through the goodness of thy character and the purity of thy mind.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

As a harp finely tuned by the skill of God, O Apostle James, thou didst set thyself to summon the nations, by thy words and acts teaching them to acknowledge Christ. And thou didst enlighten all to confess the true divinity of Jesus, the Savior of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone V —

With faith we celebrate the most cherished day of thy memorial, O glorious James, honoring thee not as the son of Alphæus, but as the apostle of Christ and preacher of His ineffable incarnation. Wherefore, ever standing with the incorporeal ones, with the choirs of the apostles and martyrs before the throne of the Master, pray thou earnestly to our Savior and God, that He save us.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Thou art the temple and portal, the palace and throne of the King, O most honored Virgin, through whom Christ the Lord, my Deliverer, Who is the Sun of righteousness, hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, desiring to enlighten that which He fashioned by His own hand in His image. Wherefore, O most hymned one, as thou hast acquired maternal boldness before Him, entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved.

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy apostle, entreat the merciful God, that He grant to our souls remission of transgressions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, O Virgin Theotokos; for thy Son and our God, accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh He had received of thee, hath delivered us from corruption, in that He loveth mankind.

AT COMPLINE

Canon of the venerable Andronicus,

in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Having first cleansed thy soul with valiant virtues, O Andronicus, and been set afire by the burning coals of divine love, thou didst escape the burning of the flesh; for thou didst have divine dew from on high, ever bedewing thee.

Submitting to the Master’s commands as the patriarch Abraham did of old, O father, thou didst leave thy country and didst forsake thy kinfolk; and, far from wife and riches, thou didst dwell alone in the desert, O blessed one.

Thou didst fulfill the commandment of the Lord, selling all that thou hadst and distributing it to the poor, and thereby thou didst acquire the precious pearl, which receiving, thou wast made abundantly wealthy with a rich outpouring of myrrh.

*Theotokion:* Of His own will the Creator of Adam, Who holdeth all things in His hand, was formed in thy womb, O Theotokos, and is borne in thy hands. O the awesome mystery! The Lord of all the saints appeareth as a babe!

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Adam was driven from Eden because of the counsel of Eve, but thou, O wise one, believing the counsel of thy spouse, becamest within a garden of paradise, and with her dost ever rejoice, O blessed Andronicus.

Mystically and wisely arranging all things to the good and directing mortals to salvation, the Word translated thy two beloved children from earth to the heavens, revealing to you the straight way.

Putting aside fleeting and corruptible love and leaving it to those on earth, ye bound yourselves with spiritual love, O blessed ones; wherefore, ye now abide where the habitations of the righteous are.

*Theotokion:* May she who is without doubt greater than the cherubim and the seraphim, who ineffably gave birth unto God and transformed the curse upon mortals into blessing, be ever honored; for she is our hope.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

The sweat of thy labors, dripping down from off thy flesh, was transformed into the sweet fragrance of myrrh, O most sacred Andronicus.

Like a palm-tree of lofty stature, O father, thou didst flourish in the deserts, and didst bear as fruit for God the most sweet pangs of thy labors.

With showers of tears thou didst bedew the land of the desert and didst show thy soul to be fertile with the pangs of asceticism.

*Theotokion:* Without leaving the Father’s bosom, the Lord dwelt within thine all-pure womb, O Maiden, and hath restored the whole world.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

With songs let us all hymn Andronicus, ye faithful, and let us glorify Athanasia, his spouse.

Thou didst in nowise give sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, as it is written, O Andronicus.

Receiving thy labors as a right-acceptable offering, O blessed one, the Lord hath glorified thee with myrrh.

*Theotokion:* In awesome manner didst thou give birth to One of the Trinity, O Maiden, and didst feed with milk Him Who nurtureth the nature of mortals.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

The weakness of thy nature in nowise affected the recompense which thou didst receive for the pangs of thy suffering, O venerable Athanasia.

Manifestly changing thy raiment, thou didst conceal thy nature; wherefore, without wavering thou didst reach the end of the path of salvation.

Recognizing thy husband as a wanderer, thou didst follow him, in nowise uttering a word of conversation to him.

*Theotokion:* We now offer thee the cry of Gabriel, O Maiden, crying out to thee: Rejoice! The Lord is with thee, O blessed one!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Taking the easy yoke of the Lord upon thy shoulders with all thy soul, thou didst follow after Him, O God-bearing Andronicus, and didst thoroughly reject the tumult of the world, zealously making thine abode in the desert, where thou didst blamelessly finish the race of asceticism, O blessed father, uniting thyself to God. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Defending thyself with the power of the Spirit and the armor of the Cross, thou didst bring down, as though he were a foul bird, the author of evil, who of old boasted unrestrainedly that he would lay hold of all creation.

Bearing thy cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst follow the Lord with all thy soul, and didst receive His divine glory, as a fulfiller of His commandments, O Andronicus.

The grace of myrrh, which is ever poured forth for the faithful, revealeth thy boldness before the Lord and is like unto the fluidity of water.

*Theotokion:* That He might deify my nature, the most Perfect One, Who by His word brought forth all things, sustaining and strengthening them, ineffably became a babe and issueth forth from thee, O pure one.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Watering the meadow of thy soul with streams of tears, thou didst reap the rich reward of thy miracles.

With the divine medicine of thy supplications, O favorite of the Lord, heal thou my soul, which hath been afflicted with the sores of mine offenses.

*Triadicon:* O ye faithful, let us reverently hymn the all-unoriginate and most holy Trinity, which hath brought all things out of non-existence.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden, Daniel foresaw thee as an unquarried mountain from whence was cut the Stone Who hath crushed the temples of the idols.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou pourest forth the inexhaustible grace of myrrh and grantest release from illness to all who have recourse to thee with faith, O father Andronicus.

Rejoicing, thou hast been translated from transitory things to the highest, making thine abode with the holy fathers. O father, be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy memory.

Accept my hymnody, O venerable twain, and by your entreaty to God, grant me a boon: that He may deliver me from my transgressions.

*Theotokion:* Of old, the furnace which did not consume the three children prefigured thy womb, O pure Maiden; for thou didst receive the fire of the Godhead without being consumed.

Stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

Having set aside the retribution of life, having spurned wealth and disdained fleeting pleasure, ye took up the cross like an easy yoke and followed after Christ; and have now wondrously made your abode in the resting-place of heaven. Rejoicing therein, be mindful of us who remember you faithfully and with love and reverence celebrate your sacred and honored memory, O holy ones.

Loving Thee, the Master, greatly, with all their soul the ever-memorable couple hastened after Thee; and they rent asunder all beautiful things and unbreakable bonds as though they were a spider’s web, and thereby received Thy kingdom, O Immortal One. Through their supplications, O Compassionate One, grant us cleansing of offenses, and show us to be above the passions which ever trouble our souls, O Master.

Ye were deprived of your children’s loving companionship through your great struggle, remaining bereft of consolation in this life; and ye uttered the cry of the most valiant Job, exclaiming: “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away!” Wherefore, ye did opportunely accomplish the work ye desired and have been shown to have joyfully passed over to the most lovely holy places, O most sacred twain.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Rejoice, O tender root! Rejoice, O divine staff of Aaron which put forth the unfading Blossom, O right fertile garden of paradise, tree of life blossoming forth from the root of Jesse, O pure Maiden, and feeding mortals with the bread of understanding! Rejoice, O most precious purple robe of the King of all, O Bride of God, radiant crown, splendor of hierarchs! Rejoice, O only all-pure one!

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, when she beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried out: “O Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How hath the thankless assembly betrayed thee to the judgment of Pilate? How doth it condemn to death the Life of all? Yet do I hymn thine ineffable condescension, O Word.”

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the apostle, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II —

The glorious apostle pursued the nations, teaching the ends of the earth to worship Thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Christ God. For his sake establish Thou Thy Church, and send down thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful One Who lovest mankind. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Through thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, we have become partakers of the divine nature; for Thou gavest birth for us to God incarnate. Wherefore, as is meet, we all magnify thee piously.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

Christ, the Sun of righteousness, emitted thee like a ray, to enlighten the whole world, O glorious apostle James; and with thy divine supplications thou dost illumine and with the never-waning light of God thou dost enlighten all who with faith celebrate thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O unashamed hope of those who place their trust in thee, O thou who alone supernaturally gavest birth to Christ our God in the flesh: With the holy apostles entreat Him, that He grant to the whole world cleansing of transgressions and to all of us correction of life before the end.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy Apostle James, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having caught reason-endowed fish in the net of divine words, thou didst bring them as first-fruits to our God; and desiring to be clothed in the wounds of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His sufferings. Wherefore, assembling as is meet, we honor thee, O glorious apostle, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Theotokos, noetic portal of life: From tribulations deliver those who with faith have recourse unto thee, that we may glorify thine all-holy birthgiving, unto the salvation of our souls.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth forth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel According to St. John §67 \[21:15-25\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time, Lovest thou Me? And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou ­knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He said unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who had also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, which is he who betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone IV —

As an apostle and an initiate of the mysteries, as an excellent servant of the Master, the only Messiah, O most laudable and divine herald James, entreat Him to grant victory to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, and cleansing from sins unto those who celebrate thy most holy memory.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia; and that of the apostle, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the son of Alphæus, the disciple of Christ”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

O James, disciple of Christ and seer of God, grant thy hand unto me who have striven to praise thine honored feast, and by thy supplications shine forth light upon my heart.

Watered with streams of divine wisdom, thou didst flow forth from the paradise of sweetness like a river, and of a truth hast manifestly irrigated the face of the earth with torrents of piety.

Thou hast been numbered among the most sacred choir of the disciples of Christ, O James, fulfilling the number twelve. Standing with them before the Master, be thou mindful of us.

*Theotokion:* The Lord Who stretched out the sky and founded the earth hath revealed thee to us as an earthly heaven, O all-pure Virgin, issuing forth from thee in the flesh.

*Katavasia: I will open my mouth…*

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Manifestly receiving the radiance of the divine Spirit, thou hast shown thyself to those in darkness as one splendid as the dawn, declaring the appearance of the noetic Sun to all.

Dancing in godly manner before the just and good King and treading the path to heaven, O blessed one, thou didst manifestly set thy feet in righteousness.

O James, thou didst have the Son of God Who is without beginning, and Who createth all things in His divine goodness, as thy true instructor in the mysteries, teaching thee the knowledge of the truth.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mary, thou hope of all who place their trust in thee, who gavest birth to the incarnate Word for our sake: Deliver me from divers perils and misfortunes.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having the wisdom of thy teacher truly teaching thee things past understanding, thou didst render foolish the wisdom of the Greeks, O divinely inspired one; and thou wast a divine beacon to the nations, guiding the foolish with words of piety. Wherefore, delivered from falsehood by thee, we hymn thee as is meet and faithfully call thee blessed, O divinely eloquent James. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O cloud of the noetic Sun, golden lampstand of the divine Light, O undefiled, pure and most immaculate Mistress, with the radiance of dispassion enlighten my soul which hath been darkened by the blindness of the passions, I pray; wash my polluted heart clean with torrents of compunction and tears of repentance, and cleanse me of the mire of my works, that I may cry out to thee with love: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of transgressions, for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

The Lord Himself, Who alone is holy, numbered thee among the honored choir of His disciples, O blessed one, foreseeing the honor and splendor of thy life.

Full of the miracles of the divine Spirit, O herald of God, thou workest wonders, dispelling infirmities; and thou hast freed men from the wickedness of the evil spirits.

The effulgence of God which descended upon thy heart made it divinely radiant, O blessed one, and in manner past understanding made it full of the gifts of the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Through thy divine birthgiving, O Virgin, the most holy ranks of the angels have been united to the assemblies of men; for thou gavest birth to Christ the Savior, the Author of peace.

Ode V

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

As one who conversed with the noetic Sun, thou didst assimilate the rays thereof, O blessed one. And while He is by essence the primal Light, thou becamest a secondary luminary through grace, O glorious one.

Possessed of a most pure intelligence, and having acquired a radiant and pure heart, thou didst behold the incarnate God Who is incomprehensible to the mind.

Every prophecy and every law inclineth toward thee, O disciple who art most rich; for thou wast vouchsafed to see with thine own eyes Him Who of old was proclaimed by them.

*Theotokion:* Behold, O Virgin, in accordance with the prophecy thou didst conceive in thy womb the Master and Lord Who is over all, and thou gavest birth to Him ineffably, O pure one, remaining an incorrupt virgin after giving birth.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thy beautiful feet truly proclaim the glad tidings of transcendent peace, and thy mind is excellent, O most honored disciple of Christ.

Thou hast been vouchsafed to understand and preach the awesome mystery of the incarnation of God, O ever-memorable James, who receivest pristine rays of light from the Most High Himself.

Shining with the splendors of ineffable light as is meet, O eminent apostle of Christ, do thou earnestly pray for those who celebrate thine all-honorable memory, O glorious one.

*Theotokion:* In that thou gavest birth to the good God Who hath dominion over all creation, O all-pure one, do thou utterly remove the sores of mine offenses, rendering compassionate Him Who was born of thee.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…” —

With praises let us all bless the divine herald James, who steadfastly instilled the dogmas of wisdom in the souls of the pious; for, standing before the throne of the Master of glory, he rejoiceth with all the angels, praying unceasingly for us all.

*Ikos:* In that thou art the disciple and friend of Christ, ever abiding with the immaterial choirs, illumined with the light of the never-waning effulgence, dispel the darkness of my mind, O most blessed one, that I may hymn thy luminous memory, which all creation doth hymn, celebrating piously today; for thou hast been the guide and beacon of all the faithful, O James, praying unceasingly for us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon did not fear the flame of the furnace, but, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

The multitude of the nations have thee as a divine seed illumined by the splendors and radiance of the Spirit; and it crieth aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Adorned with divinely given wisdom, thou didst destroy the wisdom of the world, O apostle, crying out with godly wisdom: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth like thunder, O Apostle James, and thou didst proclaim the incarnate Word to all lands, preaching Him as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast holier than all the saints, O Virgin Mother, in that thou didst ineffably give birth to God; and hymning Him we cry out unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The blessed youths in Babylon, braving danger for the laws of their fathers, reviled the mindless command of the ruler, and, united by the fire which burned them not, they chanted a fitting hymn unto the Almighty: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly taught the mysteries of heaven as a sacred disciple, O blessed apostle, thou didst traverse the whole world, preaching aloud the word of the Faith of Christ, and giving instruction through ineffable grace: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

As one rich and blessed, vouchsafed all beatitude, as a converser and companion of the Master, enriched truly and well in his final portion, James chanted to the Lord in gladness: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O blessed apostle, stand forth before the Savior as a most excellent intercessor for the world, asking that rich peace be granted from on high for the Churches, remission of transgressions for those who praise thee with faith and salvation for the souls of those who cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O only most hymned Mother of God, thou hast been shown to be the mediator of salvation for all, having given birth to God the Savior, the Word of God, Who hath delivered us from the ancient curse and given His blessing to those cry out with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Lament Me not, O Mother, beholding in the tomb the Son Whom thou didst conceive in thy womb without seed; for I shall arise and be glorified, and as God everlasting shall I exalt with glory those who magnify thee with faith and love.

O blessed one, thou hast appeared to the world flashing like lightning, drawing those who from of old have been sitting in the darkness and shadow of ignorance toward the never-waning light of the incarnate only-begotten Son, Whose witness and true servant thou wast, and Whom we magnify.

Receiving the breath of the tempest borne down from the heavens, and enriched by the Spirit’s tongue of fire, thou dost burn up the ungodly wisdom of the world like thorns, shining with the luminous rays of the proclamation of Christ, and dispelling the darkness, O divinely blessed one.

O divinely eloquent Apostle James, accept the hymn of supplication which we offer to thee, celebrating thine all-honored and all-radiant memory. Deliver thy servants from their sins, O eminent apostle of Christ, praying earnestly, that we may magnify thee as is meet.

*Theotokion:* In that thou didst receive the Word in thy womb without knowing man, O all-pure Virgin, thou didst remain incorrupt, giving birth for us to Emmanuel, Who is both God and man. Acknowledging Him as possessing two natures, we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion, Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…” —

We acknowledge thee not as the son of Alphæus, but as the disciple of the Word, O James, glory of the apostles; for thou hast manifestly received divine effulgence and the grace of miracles, to drive away the infirmities of those who celebrate thy most sacred memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

As thou hast compassion and great mercy, O all-immaculate Virgin Theotokos, look upon my lowliness, and dispel the storm of the passions and the assaults of grief; and deliver me from the fire of Gehenna by thy supplications, O pure one.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

With the rod of grace thou didst draw men from the depths of vanity, O right wondrous one, obedient, O James, to the behest of thy Teacher, Who enlightened thine understanding in all things and showed thee forth, O most blessed one, as an apostle and honored divine herald of His unapproachable divinity. *Twice*

The effulgence of the Spirit descended upon thee in the guise of fire, and made thee a divine receptacle, O blessed one, who quickly drivest away the darkness of ungodliness and dost illumine the world with the radiance of thy most wise words, O thou who givest utterance to mysteries, adornment of the apostles, O blessed witness of Christ.

Illumining those who sit in the darkness of ignorance with the lightning-flashes of thy preaching, O glorious one, thou didst show them to be children of God the Master because of their faith; and thou didst emulate His sufferings and death, and hast become an heir to His glory, in that thou art wise and divinely eloquent, a disciple most true.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ; and, sealed with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou wast sent by Him to nations which were perishing, to convert men to the light of the knowledge of God, O Apostle James. And, finishing the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments, thou didst commit thy soul to Christ. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

All of my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 131

\[I Cor. 4: 9-16\]

Brethren: God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Luke, §51 \[10:16-21\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “He who heareth you heareth Me; and he who despiseth you despiseth Me; and he who despiseth Me despiseth Him Who sent Me.” And the seventy returned again with joy, saying: “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name.” And He said unto them: “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said: “I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.”

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

