The 10th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs Eulampius & Eulampia

\(On this day also may be celebrated the service to the Holy Martyred Monks of the Monastery of Zographou, which service is printed at September 23rd.

For this day we provide also the service in honor of the Venerable Fathers of Optina.\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel. : “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Illumined by the Holy Spirit, O all-praised martyrs, ye arrayed yourselves against the wiles of the prince of this world; and, vanquishing him manfully, ye prevailed over him with divine skill. Wherefore, celebrating your splendid memorial today, we honor your sufferings with praises as is meet, O ye of great renown.

United in fire and torments, O holy ones, by wisdom ye remained unwavering; and burning like lamps with the fervor of the Spirit, ye have illumined the hearts of the faithful with grace. Wherefore, every age and generation doth celebrate your holy memory, hymning the Lord.

Shining forth like stars of great brilliance, the divinely wise Eulampius and the most honored Eulampia, the godly pair, illumine creation with the radiance of their struggles and the splendors of their miracles. And celebrating today their most sacred memory, with gladness we bow down before the shrine of their relics.

Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV —

Uniting your identical names to your fraternal love, and joining purity to dispassion, ye preserved your moral strength unimpaired; for where God is desired, the whole world is spurned. O the wonder! The serpent is slain! He who dwelleth beneath the earth, who spake unrighteously against heaven, hath been brought down through the suffering of the brother and sister, the wise Eulampius and Eulampia. To them let us cry out in spiritual hymns: O ye who finished well the race for Christ, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd upon the Tree, the Ewe-lamb who gave birth to Thee lamented and maternally exclaimed to Thee: “O Son most desired, Long-suffering One, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? How is it that Thy hands and feet have been nailed by the iniquitous, O Word, and Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

At the Aposticha, Glory…, in Tone IV —

Illumined with the light of the Trinity, the brother and sister set at nought the savagery of the tyrants. Wherefore, trampling down the flame, they joined chorus, chanting: “Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in unity?” And looking to divine glory, they were counted worthy of the glory of heaven, ever entreating Christ God in our behalf, that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As she beheld Thee, O Lord, nailed to the Cross, the Ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, marvelled and cried out: “What is this that I see, O my Son most desired! How hath the unbelieving council of the iniquitous rewarded Thee, in return for Thy many miracles? But glory, O Master, to Thine ineffable coming!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs have received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they cast down the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications, save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Canon of the saints, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the unity of brother and sister”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Enkindled by the love of Christ, O martyr Eulampius, thou didst reject the darkness of the world and didst fervently approach the immaterial light of heaven, O most blessed and all-wise one.

Thy love for God averted the onslaught of torments, O all-wise martyr Eulampius, and through abstinence and standing firm thou didst truly burn up legions of demons, O greatly lauded one.

Having strengthened an army of martyrs with thy divinely eloquent tongue, O thou who art most rich, thou didst bring to Christ a divine company, a catch of great richness, receiving with them imperishable crowns.

*Theotokion:* Coming to thy womb from on high and becoming flesh, O all-pure one, God manifestly passed through it, raising up in Himself those who had fallen and making mortals His children by grace, O most hymned and pure Virgin.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

The enemy wished to destroy souls by raising up a wicked letter of falsehood, but thou didst cast him into the abyss.

Enkindled with love for thy brother, O maiden, thou didst manifestly pursue the beauty of Christ, O ever-glorious martyr Eulampia.

*Theotokion:* Having received God the Word without seed in thy womb, O all-pure one, thou gavest birth unto Him in manner past understanding, without confusion.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having steadfastly passed through the dark clouds of torments, O athletes, ye shone with the grace of the Savior like the sun. And bound together in godly manner by fraternal love, ye were splendidly adorned with similar pangs. Wherefore, after your repose ye received boundless grace from on high to heal afflictions, O favorites of the Lord. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor your holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having fallen into greatly tangled perils from enemies visible and invisible, and been beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, O pure one, I flee to the haven of thy goodness as to my fervent help and protection; wherefore, O all-pure one, earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly praise thee, ever beseeching Him, O all-pure Theotokos, to grant remission of offenses unto those who fittingly hymn thy glory.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Spurning all the delusion of the world for the sake of the Creator’s love, O athletes, ye desired Christ alone, crying out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Entering upon the flame of the furnace and trampling it underfoot, O martyrs, ye were enriched in godly manner with dew from heaven, crying out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Illumined with the effulgence of the Trinity, the two valiant martyrs destroyed the darkness of the idols, crying out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* In giving birth unto Christ without corruption, O all-immaculate Virgin Mary, thou didst stem the onslaught of death, uniting the generations of mortals to the incorporeal ranks.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

The assaults of the tortures had no effect upon you, O steadfast ones, but manifestly set your spiritual feet firmly upon the rock of the Savior.

Having mightily vanquished the feints of the ancient one, ye set at naught the bloody sacrifices of the idols with the shedding of your blood, O glorious ones.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, Bride of God, who gavest birth to the Joy Who hath deified mortals and hast borne God in thine arms: thou hast removed the curse.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Your blood hath been shown to be the healing of soul-corrupting passions, O all-blessed athletes, for all who with faith have recourse to your divine and most splendid shrine.

Having suffered lawfully for Christ, O glorious and truly all-blessed ones, ye have been enriched with a crown of incorruption, and have received the kingdom of heaven and a divine reward.

*Theotokion:* Finding thee to be like an all-pure blossom, a lily of the valley amid thorns, O Mother of God, the Bridegroom took flesh within thy womb.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Let us hymn the valiant martyrs, the brother and sister according to the flesh: the wise Eulampius and Eulampia; for with the power of the Crucified they put the wiles of the most iniquitous one to shame. Wherefore, they have been shown to be the glory and boast of martyrs.

*Ikos:* O ye faithful, in sacred songs and hymns let us praise the two athletes today, for they have cast down the delusion of the idols, reduced the fire of polytheism to ashes and put the demons to shame. They were not afraid of the anger of the tormenters, neither did they fear the fire or the raging of the wild beasts, but struggled well and valiantly. The glorious Eulampius, the honored Eulampia and their fellow athletes have been shown to be the glory and boast of the martyrs.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Enriched with divine understanding, O ever-memorable martyr Eulampius, thou didst truly put down all the retribution of the impious, chanting: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Running surely, O athletes, ye divinely united yourselves to the love of the Creator, chanting with soul and body: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* In strange manner thou didst conceive the Word of the Father in thy womb, O all-pure Virgin, and gavest birth to Him in the flesh for those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Neither the multiplication of torments, nor the fire, nor wounds, nor the boiling cauldrons, nor the sharp edge of the sword, were able to separate you from the love of Christ, O glorious athletes; but ye overcame them, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Now, in good time, ye have been enriched with the kingdom of God for your pangs, O glorious athletes, ever-glorious Eulampius and honored virgin martyr Eulampia, who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* As thou alone gavest birth to God with thy seedless birthgiving, O pure Mistress and Mother who knewest not wedlock, render Him merciful, that thy flock may be preserved from the temptations of the enemy and may cry unto Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

With the outpouring of your blood, O martyred athletes, ye destroyed the delusion of idolatry, ­receiving as reward for your torment a habitation and a resting-place in heaven.

Behold! in place of prison, fetters, fire and wounds, O glorious martyred athletes who are most rich, ever-shining light, spaciousness, the coolness of joy, and goodly grace have been given you.

Having completed the divine course of your honorable suffering, ye make your abode amid the splendors of God, where the choirs of the ranks of the angels, the multitudes of the righteous and the assemblies of the martyrs are, O ever-memorable ones.

*Theotokion:* The prophecies of the prophets have now reached their end, O most pure Virgin Maiden, for thou hast given birth for us to God incarnate. Wherefore, with the angel we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Mistress!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

The divinely wise Eulampius and the honorable Eulampia, the two fraternal athletes, have been enriched with majesty by the providence of God; for they shine with martyric splendors and the effulgence of healings.

Theotokion —

From thee, O pure Maiden, hath God, Who transcendeth being, robed Himself in the essence of a human being in His great loving-kindness, without confusing the understanding of both natures, but being one Son with two natures after His birth.

