The 11th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Philip of the Seventy, One of the Seven Deacons

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father Theophanes the Confessor and Hymnographer, Bishop of NicÆa

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the holy martyrs Zinaïda and Philonilla\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 3 stichera of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...” —

O blessed Philip, who as one full of wisdom and grace divine wast numbered among the seven deacons, thou wast chosen with Stephen to minister to the needs of the saints. Wherefore, beholding him slain, thou didst hasten to Samaria at the command of God, O glorious one, preaching the word of God and enlightening those who before were in darkness, O most wise one, whom thou didst make children of the day through the Spirit of God.

Beholding the divine signs wrought by thy hand — the recovery of sight by the blind, the healing of the paralyzed, the expulsion of unclean spirits where they lived — the people marvelled, O Philip, and came to thee for spiritual cleansing, brought swiftly from unbelief to faith. Wherefore, when they heard of this, the divine choir of the apostles were gladdened, for a multitude of Samaritans was led to God.

Being thyself a chariot of the Word, O divinely eloquent one, beholding the right wondrous eunuch of Candace riding upon a chariot, questioning and in doubt, thou didst overtake him and didst reveal to him the discourse and manifestation of things desired, O blessed one; and, believing, he asked of thee divine cleansing. And when he had received it, the Creator of all made him a divine preacher, the first among the martyrs of all Ethiopia.

And 3 stichera to the venerable one, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside...” —

Radiantly didst thou shine forth, O glorious Theophanes, in the firmament of faith like a star most bright, dispelling all the darkness of the heretics with the rays of thy light and illumining with thy divine teaching those who turn to thee with faith and love. Wherefore, with love do we celebrate thy radiant feast. Pray thou with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Having provided thy soul with labors of asceticism, thou didst put down the uprisings of the flesh, O most sacred father, and didst make thy mind a dwelling-place of the divine Trinity, O glorious one. Thou wast raised up to where the armies of the martyrs, the assemblies of hierarchs and ineffable beauty are, and with them dost thou now rejoice, standing in glory before Christ, praying with boldness in behalf of our souls.

With the divine streams of thy tears, O hierarch, thou didst flood the whole encampment of the demons as though it were helpless; and by thy continual supplication of God and thy mighty ascents thou didst cast down to the earth prideful exaltation and didst ascend to the splendid mansions of heaven, wherein thou dost abide with the angels, standing before Christ, praying with all the company of the blessed ones.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

Dragged down have I been by my wicked way of life, and enslaved by the deception of the evil one, O Bride of God, wretch that I am; but I have recourse to thy most wondrous loving-kindness and thy fervent aid, O all-holy Maiden. Deliver me from the bonds of temptations and grief, and save me from the assaults of the demons, O all-immaculate one, that with love I may glorify and hymn, worship and magnify thee, the ever-blessed one, O Mistress.

Or this Stavrotheotokion —

Of old, when the unblemished Ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried aloud: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that the ungrateful assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemneth Thee, the Life of all, to death? Yet do I hymn, O Word, Thine ineffable condescension.”

Troparion of the Apostle, in Tone III —

O holy apostle Philip, entreat the merciful God, that He grant our souls forgiveness of transgressions.

Glory..., Troparion to the venerable one, in Tone VIII —

Instructor in Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon to the whole world, divinely inspired adornment of hierarchs, O Theophanes most wise, thou hast enlightened all by thy teachings. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.

Now & ever..., Theotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon to the Apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divine glory of Philip,” the composition of the venerable Joseph, in Tone VI —

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Illumined with the most splendid radiance of Christ, O wise one, thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary in thy partaking of divinity, bearing a torch before the faithful in sacred manner, O glorious Philip.

In sacred manner hath the transcendent Word, Who brought about our entire being, appointed thee His sacred disciple to deliver the gentiles from unholy darkness, O wise one.

By the imposition of the hands of the sacred disciples thou wast chosen a sacred deacon with Stephen and the others, in that thou wast full of the Spirit of God, O Philip most wise.

*Theotokion:* He Who created all things out of nothingness had thee as the cause of His incarnation, O pure Mother of God. Wherefore, we, the faithful, bless thee as is meet.

Canon to the Venerable One, in the same tone —

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

By thy prayers drive away the gloom of my mind, O hierarch of Christ, that with songs I may hymn thy sacred and radiant memory, O glorious one.

From Sion didst thou flow like a river, O glorious one, and with exceedingly divine streams hast thou given drink unto the assemblies of the faithful, and thou hast cried out: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Having illumined thy soul with divine splendor, O Theophanes, thou didst utterly consume the pleasures of the passions with the fire of abstinence, truly chanting: Let us chant a hymn unto Christ!

*Theotokion:* With the most splendid rays of the light of thy Son illumine thou my benighted soul, O Theotokos, and still thou the turmoil of the passions by thine intercessions, O pure one.

Ode III

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Children of light didst thou make of those who were in the darkness of unbelief, O blessed one, declaring the glory of the Word in awesome signs, like a lofty heaven.

Proclaiming in sacred manner Christ Who shone forth from the tribe of Judah, O blessed one, with the light of grace thou didst show Him forth Whom Moses and the prophets foretold of old.

With words flowing with sweetness dost thou prevail upon those long cast off through ignorance, to reject soul-destroying poison and accept the grace of salvation, O divinely inspired Philip.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden, thou wast shown to be a mystic candlestick truly bearing the Light Who, in His extreme goodness, doth enlighten those who before were stuck fast in the night of ignorance.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Thou wast shown to be one full of the divine Spirit, O wise one, richly nourishing the hearts of those who look to thee with the sweetness of piety and the living word.

Shining forth with the commandments of divine splendor, O most blessed one, thou didst drive away the gloom of heresy, chanting unto Christ, the Bestower of life: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Ascending the mountain of divine virtues, O hierarch, and entering into the darkness, thou didst unite thyself with God and didst receive the tablet of wisdom, the law of grace.

*Theotokion:* Lo! the ladder of Jacob which he once beheld set up, whereon God established Himself, hath been shown to be the pure, radiant and virginal Theotokos.

Kontakion of Theophanes, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the Highest...” —

Thundering forth the divine incarnation of Christ, thou didst utterly denounce the incorporeal foe, O wondrous Theophanes. Wherefore, we all piously cry out to thee with faith: Pray thou unceasingly in behalf of us all!

Sessional hymn of the Apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...” —

Shown forth as an expeller of demons and as a beacon enlightening those who are in darkness, thou didst reveal the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin; and having destroyed temples of idols, thou didst raise up churches to the glory of God. Wherefore, we honor thee and radiantly celebrate thy divine memory, and together we cry out to thee: O apostle Philip, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory...: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...” —

Thou hast appeared today, O venerable one, as another sun, that of the Church, illumining her with the lightning flashes of thy divine words, as a disciple of the Lord, O Theophanes.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Stretching forth thine all-pure hands, O Virgin Mother, protect those who that trust in thee and cry out to thy Son: Bestow Thou Thy mercies upon all, O Christ!

Or this Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding thy Son raised aloft upon the Tree, O all-pure one, thy maternal womb rent with pain, thou didst cry out in pity: “Woe is me! How art Thou set, O mine everlasting Light?”

Ode IV

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Simon, seeing thee working wonders and great signs, O Philip, accepted baptism hypocritically, without forsaking his wickedness; wherefore he hath been given over to damnation.

They who lived in the city of Samaria, beholding thee wielding great powers, O Philip, preacher of Christ, accepted the light of divine knowledge with gladness.

God, said the angel of the Lord unto thee, directed the way of the sacred Ethiopian, O Philip, that he might come to know the way of the Word’s incarnation.

The most sacred eunuch of Candace, beholding thee enjoining him, was baptized at thy hand, O Philip, and filled with the Holy Spirit, he became a divine preacher

*Theotokion:* Incarnate of thy pure blood and begotten, O all-immaculate, thy Son hath made children of men sons of God. Wherefore, we glorify thee.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Having cleansed thyself through fasting, O most wise father Theophanes, thou didst become wholly filled with light, wholly containing God, wholly partaking of the Holy Spirit.

Starved with hunger, cast into cruel imprisonment, thou didst endure torment like a martyr, O most blessed one, rejoicing in the Lord in a pure conscience.

Resplendent in thy corrections, thou wast sharpened as a sword of Christ which cutteth through the machinations of the heretics, tempered by the divine Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Thou was shown to be a most radiant beacon, a divine table, the dwelling-place of God, the ark, and the rod which put forth in the world the Blossom of Christ, O Virgin Mother.

Ode V

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Fearing not the wrath of the iniquitous, O Philip, thou didst truly walk among wolves like a lamb, bringing them to piety through the word of grace, O most blessed one.

Emmanuel was led like a lamb to the slaughter, as the glorious Isaiah doth say. And the sacred eunuch of Candace, unable to understand this, was taught by thee, O Philip.

Thee have we known as a disciple of sacred eloquence, one of the seven chosen deacons, a divine foundation of the Church, a beacon for all who are in darkness, O Philip.

*Theotokion:* Confessing thee truly to be the Theotokos with all our heart, we are delivered from temptations and vexations by thine intercessions before the Lord and God of all, O divinely blessed one.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

With thy radiant splendors, O most sacred father, thou didst destroy the gloomy darkness of the heretics, illumining and enlightening the ends of the world with the light of knowledge divine.

With grievous wounds did the proponents of ungodliness wound thee who art right wondrous, whom the ranks of angels have embraced as a hierarch of Christ and a divine martyr.

Thou hast been a radiant guide for those who are astray, O father, a helmsman for those who sail the sea, firm ground for those who are tossed about by the assaults of cruel enemies, and an immovable rampart.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou hast been shown to be the glory of mortals and a refuge for sinners, the beauty of Jacob, which God loved and wherein He chose to dwell.

Ode VI

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Full of spiritual waters, like a river of divine Eden didst thou issue forth, watering the ends of the earth with a calm wave and giving drink to the hearts of the faithful, O right wondrous one.

When thou didst open thy lips, O disciple of Christ, they were filled with divine knowledge; and when thou didst pry open the maw of the evil one, thou didst rescue countless multitudes of those he had swallowed, and didst save them, O apostle.

The might of the invisible foe was cast down, and he perished when with the might of the Spirit thou didst preach Christ crucified, Who called the nations to Himself, O Philip.

*Theotokion:* O Christ most holy, Thy holy Mother gave birth unto Thee, the Author of creation, outside the laws nature, and in manner transcending nature she truly remained an undefiled Virgin.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Like the sun, thou didst emit rays of divine splendor, O most blessed one, praising the sufferings, bonds, wounds and wondrous struggles of the martyrs, O hierarch of Christ.

Praising the all-pure Mistress with thy tongue in a pure manner, O divinely wise one, thou hast chanted splendid discourses which gladden the assemblies of the faithful and the hearts of the wise.

With the writing on thy most honorable and pure face, O wise one, thou dost obliterate the writings of the impious and their abominable and godless commands, proclaiming the veneration of the icon of Christ.

*Theotokion:* God, Who hath created and doth sustain all things by His will, Who is infinite in His divine essence, is borne in thine arms while contained within a body, O all-pure one.

Kontakion of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

The most wondrous fisher of nations, converser with the disciples of Christ, Philip, forechosen from among the apostles, doth today bestow a wealth of healing upon the world, and doth protect those who praise him from evil circumstances. Wherefore, together we cry aloud to him: Save us all by thy prayers, O apostle!

*Ikos:* Declaring the glory of God like the heavens, O thou who didst thyself see Christ, thou didst draw far-off nations to the faith, that they might be close to God. Wherefore, like Moses the giver of the law, thou dost enrich thy flock, O all-praised one; for of old he divided the sea and led his people across, and afterwards in the desert fed them with heavenly bread; but thou, delivering all creation in Christ from cold and cruel lack of faith, hast led up to the heavenly mansions on high those who cry: Save us all by thy prayers, O apostle!

Ode VII

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The All-divine hath led thee, O Philip, as a horse roiling the sea of the nations, crusheth the heads of the foe and doth chant unto Him with song: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having become an imparter of mysteries, O wise Philip, thou didst teach lands and nations, imparting the mystery hidden before all the ages, and thou didst cleanse them of abominable mysteries.

Thou didst appear as a most magnificent star, O glorious Philip, and the adornment of Tralles, wherein thy precious body doth lie working most glorious wonders for the enlightenment of those who piously bless thee, O wise one.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin Mary, saved by thee day and night from the harmful attacks of the enemy, all manner of temptations and defilements of soul, we call thee the Theotokos.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon did not fear the flame of the furnace, but, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Dividing the word of truth, subjected to persecution, O hierarch Theophanes, thou didst endure the trial of wounds and didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

The streams of thy dogmas, O wise one, have overwhelmed the sea of the ungodly who do not chant unto Christ our God: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

The rivers of thy words flowing with honey, O Theophanes, have filled with divine gladness the souls of men who in songs chant unto God most glorious.

*Theotokion:* The Son of God, Who was incarnate in thy womb, O Virgin Mother, hath now appeared, working a great mystery in thee. To Him do we chant with gladness: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Using the divine word as it were salt, O most blessed one, thou didst dispel the foul stench and didst heal the hearts of men, that they might honor and glorify the Trinity forever.

The legs of the lame were strengthened at thy word, O wise one, and the vile and unclean spirits lamented, unable to endure the grace given thee.

They who of old lived in Samaria, beholding the many wonders wrought by thee through the power of the Spirit, the Source of grace, received a ray of grace from thee, O Philip.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin, strengthen thou my soul which is vexed by the malice of the adversary, O thou who by divine regard hast received within thyself Him Who moveth all things, yet is Himself unmoved.

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The blessed youths in Babylon, braving danger for the laws of their fathers, reviled the mindless command of the ruler, and, united by the fire which burned them not, they chanted a fitting hymn unto the Almighty: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly holding to the law of the fathers, O most blessed one, thou didst spit upon the mindless command of the most iniquitous ruler who was destroying those who piously venerated the image of the Lord, which He assumed when He manifested Himself for the world through the Virgin Maiden. Him do we exalt supremely forever!

A divine intellect, a most harmonious harp of the all-holy Spirit, a melodious nightingale, the summit of the faithful, pillar and ground of Orthodoxy, the firmament of the Church, boast of monks, the glory and strength of the fathers, wast thou shown to be, O wise Theophanes, hymning Christ forever.

A vial of myrrh of the all-holy Spirit wast thou shown to be in the outpouring of thy myrrh-scented and wise teachings, O father, destroying the fœtid corruption of delusion; and with thy manner of life thou dost perfume the honored Church, crying out unceasingly: With hymns do we exalt Thee supremely forever, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou art shown to be that most fertile mountain of God which thy forefather David described of old, chanting prophetically, whence Christ, the Cornerstone, was cut, Who hath crushed all the might of idolatry. Him do we unceasingly hymn and exalt supremely forever!

Ode IX

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Beholding things for which thou didst look from of old, and having received a divine and unchallenged authority, O divinely eloquent Philip, thou didst teach men concerning it. Adorn thyself and dance, delighting in divine enlightenment and consolation!

Like a lamp, like a star, like the great sun, thou hast traversed the world with thy luminous rays, announcing thy divine proclamation. And having come to Tralles, a city of Asia, becoming a leader thereof, O blessed one, thou didst repose therein.

To those near and far away didst thou proclaim the Cross, death and resurrection of the Deliverer, being thyself a starry heaven glittering with divine radiance, O Philip, right wondrous apostle of Christ.

The earth covered thy much-suffering body, which emitteth the radiance of healings, and heaven possesseth thy holy spirit, which maketh merry with the apostles. With them do thou remember us who praise thee, O wise one.

*Theotokion:* Every breath doth offer thee a cry of thanksgiving, which soundeth forth with gladness, saying: Rejoice, thou fiery throne of the Most High! Rejoice, most spacious field of God! Rejoice, O pure one, magnificent crown of the apostles!

Canon to the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Ineffable is the Offspring of the seedless conception, and incorrupt the Fruit of the Mother who knew not man; for the birthgiving of God restoreth nature. Wherefore, in Orthodox manner all of us, the generations of men, magnify thee as the divine Bride and Mother.

He who cannot bear to gaze upon the One Who loveth mankind, Who is thy Champion in the Church of Christ, laid snares for thee. Yet thou didst remain unmoved, valiantly and with manly mind opposing the ungodly rulers, exhorting them to venerate the image of Christ, O Theophanes.

Adorned with the ineffable beauty of the Trinity and bedecked with splendors, O divinely wise one, thou dost shine forth, O thou who art most rich, and dost truly stand at the throne of thy Creator and God, where the voice of those who keep festival is heard, O God-bearing father Theophanes.

Thou hast received honor for thy struggles, as is meet, and now, crowned, thou dost rejoice with the angels in the heavens, where are the assembly of prophets and apostles, a truly great army of martyrs and choirs of patriarchs. Remember us, O father Theophanes.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, blessed and most glorious, pure Mother who knewest not wedlock, who dost fight on behalf of faithful kings in battle against barbarians and dost protect us from all the malevolence of the enemy, grant us victory, that, hymning thy Son, we may magnify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars...” —

O apostle of Christ, throughout all the world hath thy proclamation gone, whereby thou didst preach God to us. Him do thou entreat in our behalf, that He shine upon us His noetic light.

Glory..., that of the venerable one: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...” —

Thou hast been shown forth to the Church as a divine light, O Theophanes, illumining it with the splendor of thy hymns and with the light of thy face whereon thou didst bear the wounds of Christ as an adornment. Cease thou never to pray to Him in behalf of thy flock, O father.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

The garment given me of old in the font of baptism have I defiled with the wantonness of the passions, and, wretch that I am, I am afraid, mindful of the hour of the divine and truly dread Judgment. O all-immaculate Virgin, intercede for me and deliver me from the awful threat.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon of the Apostles, in Tone VIII —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Reading from the Acts of the Apostles § 20 \(8:26-39\).

In those days, the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying: “Arise, and go toward the south, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert.” And he arose and went: and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning; and sitting in his chariot he read Isaiah the prophet. Then the Spirit said unto Philip: “Go near, and join thyself to this chariot.” And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Isaiah, and said: “Understandest thou what thou readest?” And he said: “How can I, except some man should guide me?” And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him. The place of the Scripture which he read was this: “He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened He not His mouth: in His humiliation His judgment was taken away: and who shall declare His generation?” And the eunuch answered Philip, and said: “I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?” Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said: “See, here is water: what doth hinder me to be baptized?” And Philip said: “If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest.” And he answered and said: “I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.” And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel According to St. Luke § 50 \(10:1-15\).

At that time, the Lord also appointed seventy other disciples of His, and sent them two and two before His face into every city and place, whither He Himself would come. Therefore said He unto them: “The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.

Communion Verse —

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

