The 12th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs

Probus, Tarachus & Andronicus

Commemoration Of The Holy Hierarch Cosmas Of Jerusalem, Bishop Of Maïuma, The Composer Of Canons

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of our holy father Martin, Bishop of Tours\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Thy face shattered, thy neck wounded, thy bones broken by staves, thy feet and head burned, cruelly stabbed with goads, thine ears and lips cut away, forced to drink vinegar, cast to the wild beasts and beheaded with the sword, thou didst rejoice, O martyr Tarachus.

Beaten, stabbed with goads, thy sinews severed, thine eyes put out, cast as food to the wild beasts, exposed to the fire and beheaded by the sword, thou didst endure, O blessed one, adornment of the martyrs and confirmation of the Church, O glorious athlete Probus, peer of the angels.

Burned with fire, beaten with leather scourges, raked with claws, thy sinews severed, thy theologizing tongue cut out, thy teeth savagely uprooted, O Andronicus, having wrestled with wild beasts and met thine end under the sword, thou didst finish thy contest and receive thy crown.

And 3 stichera of the hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As one who sustaineth us with wisdom, and nurtureth us with purity, a treasury of understanding, a most renowned theologian, a divine disciple, an enlightener of the faithful, do we praise thee, O blessed hierarch Cosmas, entreating the Master through thee, that we all be delivered from corruption, misfortunes and all harm.

Thou didst live thy life in abstinence, keeping vigils and fasting, in chastity and humility, O glorious one, and wast in all ways enriched by the knowledge of transitory things below and by heavenly splendors, O blessed one; and thou hast manifestly thundered forth the incomprehensible, awesome and great mystery of the King of all.

Thou wast humble-minded and meek, serene and goodly of speech, kind and guileless, chaste and righteous, most simple and wholesome, O venerable Cosmas. And as a hierarch revealed by God in sanctity, thou didst tend thy flock on the verdure which groweth by the waters of salvation, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, we now call thee blessed.

Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV —

Enlisting in Christ’s army, ye forsook all the beautiful things of earth and, taking your cross upon your shoulders, didst follow Him through most elaborate tortures and did not deny Him before the rulers and many tormenters. The angels crowned your heads with wreaths of victory, O ye who are valiant of soul, and ye have entered into the great bridal-chamber with splendor. O Probus, glory of the martyrs, Tarachus, destroyer of the demons, and Andronicus, victory of the faithful: as ye have boldness before the Savior of all, pray ye for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Cross, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee, maternally: “O my Son most desired! How is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How have Thy hands and feet been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, O Word? How hast Thou shed Thy blood, O Master?”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone I —

Probus, Tarachus and the wise Andronicus, the threefold company, equal in number to the Trinity, appearing like radiant stars from the East, summon creation to a sacred festival; for they gave their flesh to the wild beasts and, having stained the ground with their blood, they join chorus with the angels in the heavens, bearing crowns, and entreating God Who loveth mankind in our behalf, that He grant us remission of transgressions and great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…” —

Beholding Thine unjust slaughter, the Virgin, weeping, cried out to Thee, O Christ: O my Child most sweet! How is it that Thou diest unjustly? How is it that Thou hangest upon the Tree Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the waters? O most merciful Benefactor, Leave me not alone who am thy Mother, I pray Thee!”

Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone V —

The hosts of heaven marvelled at the corrections of the holy martyrs, how in their mortal bodies they invisibly vanquished the incorporeal foe, contending well with the power of the Cross. And they pray to Christ, that our souls find mercy.

Glory…: Troparion of the hierarch, in Tone VIII —

O instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon of all the world, divinely inspired adornment of hierarchs: O all-wise Cosmas, by thy doctrines thou hast enlightened all. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two canons of the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I sing the glory of Thy martyrs, O Savior”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Adorned with the grace of martyrdom, O martyrs, with love ye stand in the heavens before Christ, the Bestower of crowns, illumined with the light of the effulgence of the threefold Sun; and ye enlighten those who bless you with faith.

O invincible martyrs, amid persecution ye showed yourselves to be valiant warriors by your valiant struggles, driving away all the vile falsehood of impiety, in that ye are the confirmation of the Church and the might of truth.

Fending off the tempest of evil and the raging sea of ungodliness with reasonable understanding and the tranquility of the Spirit, O most wise ones, ye passed over to the havens of heaven, rejoicing.

*Theotokion:* The Word Who with the Father and the Holy Spirit is equally without beginning desired to make His abode within the Virgin’s womb, and He became flesh immutably, suffering willingly, and hath set the divine armies of the martyrs to suffer with faith.

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is “Let us wisely praise Cosmas, the composer of canons”, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Having adorned thy life with the light of the virtues, O father Cosmas, shining with the brilliance of the thrice-radiant Light, thou dost stand before thy Master. Pray thou that those who hymn thee may find enlightenment.

Thy character showeth thee to have a fitting name; for thou hast been shown to be the adornment of hierarchs and the confirmation of monastics, O wise one, and wast the abode of wisdom.

As a most wise lover of wisdom, thou didst wisely purify thy soul, O far-famed Cosmas, driving away the passions of the turmoil of the world as it were the gloom of darkness.

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn the pure and immaculate Maiden Mary, reverently glorifying her together as the Mother of God, crying: Rejoice, O pure Bride of God, blessed Virgin Mother!

Ode III

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Mightily opposing the tyrant, O Tarachus, and steadfastly enduring the battering of thy face, made valiant by the power of the Spirit, thou didst crush the jaws of the noetic lions.

Lacerated and burned, thy breast pierced with goads, thy divinely glorious mouth smitten, with high-minded understanding thou didst endure also the wounding of thy back and belly, O martyr Probus.

Suspended like a lamb, thou didst withstand the pain of most grievous wounds, O martyr Andronicus: the burning of fire, the uprooting of thy teeth and the excision of thy theologizing tongue.

*Theotokion:* The all-transcendent Word, Who hath brought all things into being, selecting thee, O pure one, as His good, beautiful and chosen one, desired to make His abode within thine immaculate and God-pleasing womb.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

With beautiful hymns thou didst gladden the Bride of Christ, moving her to hymnody, manifestly setting forth the divine mysteries of Christ.

Nurtured on the laws of Christ, O father Cosmas, thou didst nourish the flock entrusted to thee with Orthodox precepts.

Having acquired within thee a soul burning with the fire of divine zeal, O venerable father Cosmas, thou didst burn up all heresies.

*Theotokion:* The shadows have passed away and the truth of Christ hath shone forth, O Mother of God; for receiving flesh from thy womb, He hath saved us.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the chosen leader…” —

Adorned with the virtues, O divinely inspired Cosmas, thou wast the ornament of the Church of Christ; for thou hast embellished it with hymns, O blessed one. Pray thou to the Lord, that we be delivered from all the wiles of the enemy, for we cry: Rejoice, O thrice-blessed Cosmas!

Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having armed themselves like youths with mighty faith in the Holy Trinity, Andronicus, Probus and the most wise Tarachus destroyed the might of the falsehood of polytheism and bound the people to divine love. Wherefore, receiving the honors of victory, they rejoice with the choirs of the incorporeal hosts. Let us cry out to them with faith: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor your holy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in the same tone & melody —

Having been raised in piety and faith and adorned thy mind and soul with wisdom, thou didst flee all earthly cares and, dwelling alone and setting thy mind on ineffable things, wast vouchsafed great grace; wherefore, thou hast adorned the divine Church of Christ with mellifluous hymns and doctrines. O holy hierarch Cosmas our father, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having conceived the Wisdom and Word in thy womb without being consumed, O Mother of God, thou gavest birth for the world, to Him Who sustaineth the world and didst carry in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things, the Nurturer of all, the Author of creation. Wherefore, I entreat thee, O most holy Virgin, and glorify thee with faith, that I may be delivered from transgressions. And, on the day of judgment, when I must needs stand before the face of my Creator, O pure Virgin Mistress, grant me thine aid, for all things soever thou desirest, thou canst do, O most hymned one.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and, bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Observing Thy law, O Word, and despising the laws of the iniquitous who commanded, with demonic wiles, that Thou, the Creator, be reviled, the martyrs received the peace of heaven, having withstood all the threefold billows of torture.

Thou didst love to bear the yoke of Christ, and, crushed by the yoke on thy neck, thou didst rejoice. And having the Cross as a staff of mighty power, O most blessed Tarachus, thou didst endure the blows of many rods, crying: glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Made powerful by the divine Spirit, thou didst manfully endure the painful severing of thy tendons and the plucking out of thine eyes, O martyr Probus, enlightened most perfectly by knowledge of the Trinity, joining thyself to the choirs on high.

As a youth, O martyr Andronicus, thou didst stand before the tribunal, mightily setting thyself against the enemy. Wherefore, when they severed thy tendons, they rendered thee all the more powerful, and thou didst crush his head beneath thy foot as thou madest thy way on high.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone didst bear in thy womb the incarnate God Who bringeth all things into being. And the divine martyrs suffered without wavering, confessing Him in the arena, O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, thou wonder of the angels and wounding of the demons.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having first rid the eye of thy heart of the turmoil of the passions, O hierarch Cosmas, thou didst chant beautiful and saving hymnody, and hast enlightened the Church.

O Cosmas, thy most laudable and delightful hymns, adorned with dogmas and the beauties of melody, have become the healing of all despair for those who love them.

The Church, which had become sick through the blasphemous and foolish edicts of Copronymus, didst thou heal with writings which thou didst melodiously chant, O most blessed one.

In that thy hymns are wondrous and full of all understanding, O father, through them thou hast manifestly revealed to all the mysteries of Christ, which are truly awesome and all-wondrous.

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn the all-holy Theotokos, who gave birth to the Word of God incarnate, in two natures but a single hypostasis, as the godly Cosmas hath taught.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Ye were unwavering travellers of the narrow and hard way, cutting through the multitude of perils like the foam of the sea, O athletes, establishing your hearts upon the rock of faith like immovable pillars.

Speaking divine things and theologizing the doctrines of salvation, thou didst endure the cutting away of thy lips, O martyr Tarachus, but with strength of mind thou didst shut the mouths which spake blasphemy against God the Creator.

Thy four limbs stretched out, covered with the wounds of stripes, thou didst valiantly display uprightness of soul; wherefore, appearing, crowned, with thy fellow athletes, O Probus, thou standest before the King of all.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast greater than the hosts of heaven, O Virgin, having given birth to the equally beginningless and eternal Word. And the athletes, illumined by His splendors, passed through the night of ungodliness.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Thy sound hath passed over all the ends of the earth, O wise Cosmas, gladdening with divine hymns those who praise thee.

Thou didst say that, in manner transcending the laws of nature, the all-holy Theotokos gave birth to the all-divine Word. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Sweetly chanting wondrous hymns, thou didst hymn the ineffable nativity of the Master from the all-pure Virgin, O most sacred one.

*Theotokion:* The lightning-flash of thy birthgiving hath illumined the whole world, O most hymned one, and the earth hath been moved from falsehood to faith therein.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Becoming a weapon of the Mighty One through faith, ye manfully wounded the hearts of the pagans, contending against them valiantly, O athletes of great renown.

As of old the wild beasts cowered before Daniel in the pit, so now were they terrified of the faith of the mighty warriors in the arena, subdued by their honored sufferings.

Tarachus, imitating Thy pierced side, O Master, was pierced in the side; and he was given vinegar to drink, and his head was cruelly burned with fire.

*Theotokion:* Having conceived the Preëternal One in thy womb without seed, O pure one, thou gavest birth in the flesh to Him Who is incorporeal by nature, and didst nourish with milk Him Who nurtureth all, O Mother of God who knewest not wedlock.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thy words were like sweet honey-comb, delighting the hearts of the pious who hymn the baptism of the Savior and Symeon’s encounter and passing.

Not in words, but by material things, O blessed one, didst thou set forth in hymns the raising of Lazarus from the dead, the children’s praise and the hatred of the Jews.

Thou didst adorn the elevation of the thrice-blessed Tree, chanting hymnody full of all gladness and joy in the hymns thereof, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Following thy divinely inspired words, O Virgin Maiden, all of us, the generations of men, call thee blessed, for thou art the blessed Mother of the good God.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

The valiant warriors and martyrs of Christ, Tarachus, Probus and Andronicus, have revealed to us the glory of the Trinity; for, contending with valor and faith, they denounced all the ungodliness of the tyrants.

*Ikos:* Valiantly emulating the sufferings of Jesus, Tarachus, Andronicus and the wise Probus suffered, rejoicing, in the arena, denouncing the ungodliness of the iniquitous. Wherefore, honoring their memory with love, we praise them in hymns and faithfully proclaim their struggles; for wondrous is the Lord Who hath glorified as luminaries in the world those who have contended with valor and faith.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Rejoicing, thou didst endure the severing of thine ears, O glorious Tarachus, in that thou art a right obedient servant of Him Who inclined His most merciful ear and hearkened to the supplications of thee who cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Afflicted with the wounds of torture, O martyrs, ye opposed the all-iniquitous ones with steadfast resolve; and as victors ye chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thy spirit was filled with divine dew and coolness when they burned thy head with a stream of fire, O Tarachus; and thou didst cry out like the children: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

With the drops of your precious blood, O saints, ye extinguished the burning coals of falsehood, exuding for us the divine dew of grace; and ye pour forth waters of healing upon those who ever praise your memory.

*Theotokion:* Without leaving the bosom of the Father, the most perfect Word emptied Himself into thy womb: and He is seen to be flesh and is born a babe. To Him do we chant, rejoicing, O Virgin: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Every soul is gladdened, reading thy hymns, O divinely wise father, and crying out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Truly thy tongue, O father, became the pen of the Holy Spirit, recording the great wonders of the Word like a swiftly writing scribe.

In thee are the rules of praise set aside, O father; for there is naught fit to serve as praise for thee who recounted the mighty works of the Master.

*Theotokion:* What mortal tongue can worthily bless thee who gavest birth to God, O Bride of God? Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Rejoice, O pure Virgin! Rejoice, O all-glorious one!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Illumined with wounds and the comely beauties of your goodly and wondrous suffering, ye all stand, crowned, before the Lord, richly filled with the light that shineth there, and chanting continually with love: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Raging within himself since he had been vanquished by your opposition, the all-mindless tyrant straightway commanded that ye be slain with the sword who chant to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Andronicus, Probus and Tarachus are honored as champions of the Trinity, right victorious martyrs, who dispelled the winter of ungodliness with the fervor of the Spirit, the foundation of the faithful, beautiful flowers of the noetic garden of paradise, havens for the tempest-tossed, immovable pillars.

*Theotokion:* With the incorporeal ranks, the armies of martyrs, the apostles and prophets, we all piously hymn the only pure Mother of God, the Mistress who hath dominion over all creation, in that she is holier than the cherubim; and we exalt Christ supremely for all ages.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Strengthened by the staff of thy dogmas, O glorious one, we who praise thee turn away from all the evils of heresy and chant piously to Christ, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Being far above all in intellect, O Cosmas, thou didst describe the meal whereat the Lord offered the life-bearing Mysteries, and the dread betrayal and inhumanity of Judas, which thou hast taught us to flee.

Shining with the rays of immaterial light, O most venerable Cosmas, thou didst describe the all-pure sufferings, burial, resurrection and transfiguration of Christ, teaching all to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou didst spring forth as a rod from the root of Jesse, O all-pure Virgin who gavest birth to the Lord, the Flower Who perfumeth us with the myrrh-laden scents of His sufferings; wherefore, we all bless thee, O Mary, Bride of God.

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

With their corruptible bodies Probus, Tarachus and Andronicus, the valiant favorites of Christ, were able to undertake incorrupt struggles and emulated the angels, receiving the immutable kingdom of God.

Mystically enkindled by the immaterial Fire, ye showed yourselves to be burning coals and consumed material falsehood, O great martyrs; and as ye shine forth light, ye illumine creation and save our souls from sufferings and misfortunes.

Today the Church of Christ doth joyfully and radiantly offer this, your divine festival, as an annual celebration; and with you the prophets, apostles and all the martyrs rejoice, O victorious athletes of great renown.

Ye have been taken up into the splendid habitations of paradise, O passion-bearers, clad in the splendid robes which ye wove with your multifarious torments; and ye stand before the throne of the Almighty, praying earnestly for all.

*Theotokion:* Have pity on me, O Savior Who wast born and preserved her who gave Thee birth incorrupt after parturition; and when Thou shalt sit to judge all my works, overlook mine iniquities and sins, in that Thou art sinless, as the merciful God Who lovest mankind.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

We magnify thee as one rich and noble, shining with rays of the virtues and illumining the faithful who honor thee with praises and chant in Orthodox manner, O thrice-holy Cosmas.

Shining with divine laws, and having guided thy flock to the life-bearing meadow, O blessed and venerable one, as is meet thou hast passed over to the heavens, reaping the fruits of thy pangs.

The never-waning Light was shown to thee who hast now been translated from transitory things and art rightly purified. And delighting therein most manifestly and purely, be thou mindful of those who honor thee, O right glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Glorifying thee as it is written, we call thee blessed, O Theotokos, the all-holy Virgin, who art more glorious than the seraphim and gavest birth to Christ Who shone forth from the Father wholly without beginning.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; and this one of the martyrs: Spec. Mel.: “As the disciples watched…” —

With hymns of praise let us crown the three-member chorus of athletes, Tarachus, Probus and Andronicus; for they endured laceration, cruel wounding and pain, and reign with Christ.

Theotokion —

Thou hast been revealed as more glorious than the cherubim and shown to be more exalted than the seraphim, as the one who gave birth to God incarnate, Who hath shown men how to walk the straight paths which lead to salvation.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \[Gal. 6: 10-17\]

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Luke, §106

\[Lk. 21: 12-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

Communion Verse —

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

