The 16th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Longinus, The Centurion Who Stood At The Foot Of The Cross Of The Lord

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O most lauded martyr Longinus, with thy blood as dye thou didst color for thyself a robe of salvation, stripping the greatly crafty one bare by thy bouts of pain. And now thou dwellest in the kingdom on high, crowned as a victor with a never-fading wreath. Wherefore, we honor thy glorious memory.

O most lauded martyr Longinus, seeing the Son of God upon the Cross, suffering of His own will and tasting death, when the sun dimmed its light and the mountains quaked, thou didst cry out to the assembly of the Jews: “Truly this is the Son of God, the Lord and King of all!”

The Hebrew people, the all-iniquitous assembly, the ungrateful nation, cut off thy head with a sword, casting it onto a dung-heap. And a blind woman, coming upon it and touching it, received her sight. O most blessed and lauded Longinus, pray for us to the Lord, that we may be saved.

Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI —

Seeing the temple quake during Thy suffering, O Christ, Longinus the centurion proclaimed Thee to the Jews as the Son of God. Wherefore, the cruel ones, cutting off thy head with a sword, cast it onto a dung-heap; and the eyes of the woman who found it, which had been shut fast in blindness, were opened. With her we cry out: O Thou Who hast crowned him who suffered for Thee, by his supplications illumine also the eyes of our hearts, that we may glorify Thee, God Who wast nailed to the Cross in the flesh, that Thou mightest save us.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having cast all aside…” —

Of old, when the unblemished Ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, she exclaimed maternally, and, marvelling, cried out: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and most strange sight which mine eyes behold? How hath the thankless synagogue betrayed Thee to Pilate’s tribunal and condemneth to death the Life of all? Yet I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word.”

Aposticha from the Octoechos. Glory…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI —

Standing before the Cross, gazing upon the events as they took place, and seeing the God-man crucified upon the Tree, thou didst cry out to Him: “Remember me in Thy kingdom, O Lord!” Wherefore, the Savior exclaimed to thee: “Blessed art thou, O Longinus! Thy memory shall be from generation to generation!”

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave birth to Thee cried out: “What is this strange mystery which I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest on the Tree, suspended in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Longinus received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tormenters and destroyed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos; and the canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the great glory of Longinus”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Illumined with outpourings of divine light, O glorious one, and standing with the ranks of angels before Christ God, enlighten those who celebrate thy splendid memory.

From unity with God naught could separate thee, who through faith wast far removed from all carnal pleasures, O martyr; and in purity thou dost delight in thine uttermost Desire.

Serving the living God with purity of mind, O most wise and blessed one, thou didst in nowise offer worship to dead graven images. Wherefore, slain, thou didst pass over into everlasting life.

*Theotokion:* At the word of the angel thou didst conceive the Word of the Father in thy womb, Who in His goodness desired to deliver mortals from irrationality, O all-pure Virgin Mother, blessed and most immaculate one.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Recognizing the true Lord on the Cross as the Son of God Who was suffering for us, thou didst believe on Him with all thy soul.

Thy soul, like irrigated land which received noetic seed, O wise one, put forth the grain of divine piety.

Sailing across the passion-plagued abyss of torments, propelled by the sail of the Cross, O glorious one, thou didst attain unto the calm havens in gladness.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou my soul, which is afflicted by assaults of the passions, O all-pure Mother of God, and guide it to salvation.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Thou didst behold the Deliverer crucified, and, illumined by His rays, didst escape the darkness of deepest ignorance, and didst unite thyself to divine understanding, believing that He is the invisible God. Wherefore, having suffered, thou hast joined the choirs of the martyrs, rejoicing, O blessed Longinus. With them ever entreat Christ God, O glorious one, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Having fallen into greatly tangled perils from enemies visible and invisible, and been beset by the tempest of my countless offenses, O pure one, I flee to the haven of thy goodness as to my fervent help and protection; wherefore, O all-pure one, earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly praise thee, ever beseeching Him, O all-pure Theotokos, to grant remission of offenses unto those who fittingly hymn thy glory.

Stavrotheotokion —

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having acquired stronger sense in the Faith, O blessed one, thou didst demolish the feeble fortress of deception, and, rejoicing, didst cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Beholding the dispassionate Lord of glory lifted up and nailed to the Tree, thou didst confess Him to be the Son of God Who was suffering of His own will, O glorious one.

Seeing death withering up through the death of the Immortal One, O Longinus, thou didst hasten to die for Him and to live after death with those who suffered right gloriously.

*Theotokion:* In manner past recounting, O all-pure one, thou gavest birth to the Word Who became man, uniting in thy womb the hypostases of Him Who is manifest as possessing two wills and activities.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Truly a sojourner in every land, O Longinus, thou wast adorned with a martyr’s wounds and hast made thy dwelling in the land of the meek.

Strengthened by the power of the Cross, O athlete Longinus, thou wast able to vanquish the feeble mindlessness of the tyrants.

Having set thy heart on a firm foundation, O most lauded one, thou didst remain unshaken by the whirlwind of temptations.

*Theotokion:* Saved by her, let us hymn the Virgin who alone, without knowing man, gave birth to God, and with faith let us call her blessed.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Seeing the mountains and earth reeling on the day of Christ’s suffering, thou wast shaken from thine unbelief and wast made steadfast through faith in Him Who suffered, O Longinus.

Seeing creation transformed, thou wast able to receive an understanding true, perfect and comprehensive, and didst turn to the recognition of God, O Longinus.

Rejoicing, thou didst endure cruel torment and with unshaken resolve didst bow thy head beneath the sword, thus cutting off the heads of the enemy by faith.

*Theotokion:* Cause thou the thorny thoughts of my heart to wither and pull them up by their roots, O most immaculate one; and render it fertile through thy mediation, O most pure Maiden.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…” —

The Church hath rejoiced in gladness on the day of the commemoration of the ever-memorable athlete Longinus, crying out: Thou art my might and confirmation, O Christ!

*Ikos:* Seeing the sky darkened by great gloom, the earth quaking, the stones split asunder, and the veil of the temple rent in twain during the divine suffering of Christ, Longinus recognized the Son of God, Who was suffering in His compassion, though He was dispassionate in His divinity and glory, sustaining and containing all things with the Father and the Holy Spirit, as true God and King. Wherefore, the martyr cried out with joy: Thou art my might and confirmation, O Lord!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Having suffered lawfully, with courage of soul thou didst put to shame all the counsels of the iniquitous, and wast lawfully crowned, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

The divine grace which fulfilleth thy relics freeth from every ailment those who piously have recourse to thee, and profess thee to be an invincible witness to the truth, O blessed one.

Thou didst not spare thy flesh, which dieth for Christ, didst refuse to sacrifice to the demons, and, rejoicing, didst offer thyself as an unblemished sacrifice to God, being beheaded by the sword, O right wondrous one.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to wash away the defilements of men through thee, O Virgin, the pure Word, finding thee pure, made His abode within thee.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having first calmed the uprisings of the flesh with vigils of prayer to the Lord, O glorious one, thou didst sleep a sweet sleep, dying for the sake of Christ Who poured forth life upon mortals through the divine sleep He slept upon the tree of the Cross, O blessed one.

As thou didst behold Christ, Who had become man in His loving-kindness, pierced in the side by a spear and pouring forth blood and water, O most blessed one, thou wast wounded by sweet desire for Him, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With the torrents of thy blood thou didst extinguish the fire of idolatry, O most wise Longinus, and, kindling thy soul with divine zeal, thou didst set fire to the graven images and their perilous temples, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having illumined the eyes of thy heart with divine splendors, thou didst speedily abandon the darkness of impiety and didst show thyself to be a star of Him Who dimmed the most brilliant light of the sun, O wise one, illumining those who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* With mouth, tongue and soul I profess thee to be the Theotokos, and entreat thee, O all-pure one: Illumine my heart with thy light, and free me from cruel darkness, who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

“The Word Who stretched out His hands on the Cross is my strength and song!”, thou didst cry out to the iniquitous, O martyr; “I accept death willingly, emulating His most blessed suffering!”

Thou wast shown to be wholly most comely, as an all-beauteous athlete endowed with divine strivings; and thou standest before the beautiful Word, receiving most rich rewards for thy pangs.

We bless thee who in thy splendor hast been shown to be a never-waning sun of sufferings, who hast illumined the whole world with beams of healings, and hast dispelled the darkness of ignorance.

Thou wast admitted to the everlasting mansions and hast joined the choirs of all the holy martyrs. With them be thou mindful of us who piously celebrate thy memory, O most blessed martyr Longinus.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be the abode of the never-waning Light, O Theotokos, through whom those in darkness and the shadow of sin have beheld the Light. Wherefore, illumine thou the senses of my heart.

Exapostilarion —

Thou didst behold Him Who holdeth all things in His hands suspended upon the Cross, by the ineffable counsel of the Godhead; and thou didst marvel at the wonder and call Him the Son of the God of heaven. And thou hast truly and worthily become a partaker of glory, in His likeness.

Theotokion —

O all-pure one, let me, who have foolishly fallen through manifold transgressions, glorify thine indisputable grace. Make haste, and by thy might rescue me from sinful falls, for thou dost save those whom thou desirest to save from all tribulations by thine invincible power.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplications unto Thee.

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \[II Tim. 2: 1-10\]

Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Do thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 113

\[Mt. 27: 33-54\]

At that time, the soldiers brought Jesus unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull. They gave Him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when He had tasted thereof, He would not drink. And they crucified Him, and parted His garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet: They parted My garments among them, and upon My vesture did they cast lots. And sitting down they watched Him there; and set up over His head His accusation written: “This is Jesus the King of the Jews”. Then were there two thieves crucified with Him, one on the right hand, and another on the left. And those who passed by reviled Him, wagging their heads, and saying: “Thou who destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save Thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.” Likewise also the chief priests mocking Him, with the scribes and elders, said: “He saved others; Himself He cannot save. If He be the King of Israel, let Him now come down from the cross, and we will believe Him. He trusted in God; let Him deliver Him now, if He will have Him: for He said: ‘I am the Son of God.’” The thieves also, who were crucified with Him, cast the same in His teeth. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying: “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” that is to say, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken Me?” Some of those who stood there, when they heard that, said: “This man calleth for Elias.” And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave Him to drink. The rest said: “Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save Him.” Jesus, when He had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints who slept arose, and came out of the graves after His resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. Now when the centurion, and those who were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying: “Truly this was the Son of God.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

