The 17th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Prophet Hosea

Commemoration Of The Venerable Martyr Andrew Of Crete

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the prophet, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most praised martyrs…” —

The Holy Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father, spake through thy tongue of the advent of Christ which would come to pass in later times, unto the restoration of creation. And now, beholding the fulfillment of what was prophesied, we honor thy memory, O prophet.

Espousing our nature, which had willfully fallen away from Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Thou didst deliver it from defilement, joining it inseparably to Thyself through union with Thee which passeth understanding. And Thy prophet, being an image of this, chastely took to wife a former harlot.

O divinely eloquent prophet, seeing thine utterances now filled with grace, standing before the God of all pray thou for all who with faith celebrate thy memory, asking for them forgiveness of sins, peace and great mercy.

And 3 stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one mighty among the martyrs…” —

Having cleaved unto the Lord from childhood, O blessed one, thou didst run the course until the end; for, armed with the Cross, thou didst set thy hands to the plough of the commandments of the Lord, as it is written. Him do thou entreat, that those who with faith celebrate thy most honored memory may be delivered from corruption and misfortunes.

Through faith thou becamest an all-precious stone without being broken; for, beaten and rolled upon the ground, thou didst make smooth the path of faith, O glorious one, rendering it easy of ascent; and thou didst overturn the opinions and the evil fame of Copronymus like a corrupt foundation, O father.

Nurtured on the dogmas of the apostles and the teachings of the divine fathers, O blessed one, thou didst venerate the visible image of the incarnate God in sacred signs and honored depictions. Wherefore, having suffered for them, O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a teacher of piety and the adornment of martyrs.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same melody —

O all-pure one, who contained in thy womb the uncontainable God Who became man in His love for mankind, received from thee our composition and manifestly deified it: Disdain me not who am sorrowful, but quickly take pity and free me from the manifold enmity and malice of the evil one.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody —

As she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the Ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and cried out to Thee maternally: “O long-suffering Son most desired, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? How is it that Thy hands and feet, O Word, have been pierced with nails by the iniquitous? How is it that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV —

Struggling first in fasting upon the mountain, with the whole armor of the Cross thou didst destroy the noetic hordes of the enemy, O most blessed one; and afterwards thou didst manfully array thyself for thy contest, slaying Copronymus with the sword of faith. And for both thou hast been crowned by God, O ever-memorable venerable martyr Andrew.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two canons for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely inspired words of Hosea”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I —

*Irmos:* Let us chant a hymn of victory unto God Who helped Moses in Egypt and by him destroyed Pharaoh and his whole army, for He hath been glorified.

Truly standing before the Bestower of life as a prophet and speaker of things divine, O Hosea, pray thou earnestly, that He deliver from temptations those who praise thee with faith.

Having cleansed the eyes of thy soul of pollution, O glorious one, thou wast vouchsafed splendidly to gaze upon things which were to come, and to foretell truly things which had not yet come to pass.

The wisdom of God, the source of foresight, showed the divinely eloquent Hosea to be an abundant river of prophecy pouring forth divine teachings.

*Theotokion:* Out of Egypt did the Father manifestly call Christ, Who had revealed Himself for our sake from the Virgin, as the God-seeing Prophet Hosea foretold of old.

Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “With love I hymn the namesake of manliness”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Having manfully enslaved the carnal passions to thy mind, as the namesake of manliness, O father, thou didst enslave the savagery of the tyrants and didst suffer lawfully. Wherefore, assembling together with faith, we call thee blessed.

Noetically enkindled like a burning coal by the fervor of the divine Spirit, thou didst melt the ice of the passions, and didst extinguish the alien fire of ungodliness with the torrents of thy blood, O divinely blessed confessor Andrew, who art most great.

Having bound thyself with the love of Christ, O father, taking up thy cross from the time of thy youth, rejoicing thou didst follow after Him, denying thyself through fasting, confession and perfect suffering.

*Theotokion:* Though my soul is ever weighed down by the sleep of despair, O all-pure Virgin Mother, I hasten to thine aid. Rouse me to the watchfulness of repentance, delivering me from everlasting torment.

Ode III

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, and illumine me with the light of Thy countenance, for there is none as holy as Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Instructed in the divine teaching of the revelation of God, O prophet, impressed with the seal of the Holy Spirit thou didst manifestly proclaim the summoning of the nations.

Thou wast vouchsafed to foresee the things of the future as though they were present, O divinely wise one, manifestly declaring the apostasy of the Jews and the destruction of the law-bound.

Thou didst foretell that Israel would be delivered, not by battle, or the bow, or weaponry, but in the Lord God Almighty, signifying for us the incarnation of the Word.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O honored Virgin who didst conceive the Word incarnate Who hath delivered us from deception by His own holy blood and body.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having established the feet of thine understanding upon the rock of the love of Christ, O father, thou wast in nowise shaken by contrary winds, crying out to thy Creator: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

Pouring forth healings both before and after thine end, thou helpest those who languish in infirmity, O venerable Andrew, and dost drive away unclean spirits, crying out to thy Creator: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

Drenched in the tears of fasting, thou didst adorn thyself with the blood of martyrdom, showing thyself to be wholly most beautiful; and thou didst hasten to Him Whom thou didst desire, crying out: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature, O most immaculate one, thou gavest birth to God the Word, Who is consubstantial with the Father and assumed the likeness of the flesh; yet didst remain a virgin even after giving birth. Wherefore, we bless thee with faith.

Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…” —

Today the imperial city doth celebrate the all-splendid feast of thy radiant memory, summoning every city and land; for it rejoiceth, possessing thy much-suffering body as a great treasure, O martyr Andrew, beacon of Orthodoxy.

Sessional hymn of the prophet, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having acquired a heart purified of the passions, O prophet, thou wast truly like a harmonious instrument of the Spirit, richly illumined by Him, O wise one, and receiving the knowledge of all things to come. Wherefore, assembling together, we celebrate thy holy memory with faith, glorifying the Savior, O ever-memorable Hosea. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

O ye faithful, as is meet let us praise him who is wondrous in fasting and contest, as a preacher of piety and a mighty champion; for, fearlessly opposing Copronymus, he preached that the image of Christ ought to be venerated, in that he is the adornment of all fasters and a model of courage for martyrs.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

He Who sitteth on the throne of the cherubim and abideth in the bosom of the Father, sitteth in thy womb as upon His holy throne, O Mistress; for the incarnate God hath truly reigned over all the nations. As we now chant to Him with understanding, entreat him that thy servants be saved.

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, she who in latter times gave birth to Thee in the flesh cried out: “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! How is it that Thou Who art glorified by the angels art now crucified of Thine own will by iniquitous men, O my Son? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* I have considered Thy dispensation, O Almighty One, and with fear have I glorified Thee, O Savior.

O most splendid and steadfast receptacle of the Spirit, pray that those who hymn thee may be saved.

Standing before the Judge of all as a prophet of God, by thy supplications deliver me from the passions.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast surpassed the ranks of the angels, O Ever-virgin, having borne their Creator in thy womb.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Obedient to the commandments of Christ, thou didst reverently venerate His image, O father; wherefore, the all-iniquitous one slew thee with multifarious wounds.

Perfumed with the sweet fragrance of the virtues, lying in the tomb thou dost perfume the faces of those who call upon thee with steadfast heart, O venerable father.

As a champion of the Orthodox, O right wondrous and venerable Andrew, with boldness thou didst denounce the most evil Copronymus who was accursedly infected with the heresy of Manes.

*Theotokion:* In that thou art fruitful, O most hymned Theotokos, thou hast given rise to the grain of grace which feedeth all who in Orthodox manner honor thee and the Word Who was incarnate of thee, O most pure one.

Ode V

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Rising at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Christ God, Who impoverished Thyself for our sake, and endured the Cross and death in the flesh.

Moved by mercy, thou hast taught us of the long-suffering, compassion and goodness of God, whereby He taketh pity on all, O divinely eloquent prophet.

Having slain death, Christ arose, as thy wise prophecy proclaimed, O divinely eloquent one, and He hath given life to the souls in hades.

By thy supplications, O Prophet Hosea, rescue me from the abyss of sin, in that thou hast blameless boldness before Christ, O divinely wise one who art most rich.

*Theotokion:* The Lord of all, the King of all, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, came under time through thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and showed Himself wearing flesh.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Hating the darkness of sin, O father, thou didst show thyself to be light through the splendor of dispassion; and with rays of healings and the grace of God thou dost enlighten the faithful who approach thy divine shrine.

Thou didst show thyself to be wholly the receptacle of God, having lived a good life and suffered with valiant resolve, O father; and now, lying in the tomb, thou remainest whole and untouched by corruption, O blessed one, releasing all the faithful from their sufferings.

Having contended bravely against the demons and against heretical men, O most blessed one, thou hast been vouchsafed everlasting glory and crowns, O venerable Andrew. Wherefore, we, the faithful, ever call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* Having ineffably given birth unto Christ, thou bearest in thine embrace Him Who taketh in His arms those inclined to evil and wretchedly in thrall to the wicked one, O most immaculate Maiden. Wherefore, we, the faithful, ever call thee blessed.

Ode VI

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Lead me up from the abyss of transgressions, I pray.

Proclaiming things to come, O most blessed Hosea, thou didst declare the descent of the Word unto men.

As thou didst foretell, immortal Life hath led up from the nether regions those dead through sin.

O prophet, thou didst reveal the abolition of the prescriptions of the law, the falling away of the Jews and the entry of the nations.

*Theotokion:* God the Word hath shone forth from thy womb, O most immaculate one, having arrayed Himself in flesh for our sake, in that He is compassionate.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

The iniquitous one cast thee into prison, O Andrew, but thou wast preserved by the Master, immutably obeying His divine will.

Thou didst pay no heed to thy body which was lacerated and covered with wounds, O blessed one, and, strengthened by God, didst endure, as though it were someone else suffering.

Lying before the pious, thou art shown to be a hidden and precious treasure, O father, and dost enrich all who honor thee with miracles.

*Theotokion:* Of old, the prophet perceived thee to be a noetic lampstand holding Christ, the divine lamp, O pure one, whereby we have all been enlightened.

Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the chosen leader…” —

Out of love for thee, O divinely blessed one, we utter hymns of praise as thanksgiving to the namesake of manliness, to the teacher of the mysteries of piety. As thou hast boldness before the Lord, save us from all evils, that we may chant: Rejoice, O ever-memorable father!

*Ikos:* Thou wast shown to be an angel of the truth from Crete, denouncing ungodliness with the voice of theology, O most wise father; and beholding thee wounded, I fear suffering, crying out and exclaiming to thee such things as these: Rejoice, O mighty warrior of God! Rejoice, faithful favorite of the Lord! Rejoice, opponent of the blasphemous foe! Rejoice, reproof of men who speak evil! Rejoice, for thou didst suffer for the image of Christ! Rejoice, for thou didst curb carnal pleasures! Rejoice, for by fasting thou didst vanquish the princes of darkness! Rejoice, for with suffering thou didst oppose Copronymus! Rejoice, ever-flowing fountain of miracles! Rejoice, thou who hast illumined the earth with thy sufferings! Rejoice, O father, thou dwelling-place of the faithful! Rejoice, our intercessor and deliverer! Rejoice, O ever-memorable father!

Ode VII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham, showing forth an image of the Trinity in the furnace, transformed the flame of the fire into dew, and cried out, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having illumined thy mind with supernatural enlightenment, O blessed Hosea, thou wast enriched with the knowledge of things to come, crying out to the Master: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Revealing Thy likeness, thou didst multiply visions in the hands of the prophets, O immortal Savior, appearing in divers forms to those who cried out to Thee with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou art the wellspring of Israel, pouring forth the waters of salvation, O Hosea, proclaiming Christ, the River of peace, to Whom we cry: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* He Who shone forth from the unoriginate Father became incarnate of thee in His ineffable mercy, O Maiden, Mother of God; and chanting to Him we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

The lofty billows of wickedness did not shake the resolve of thee who stood on the rock of the knowledge of Christ, O glorious Andrew; wherefore, thou hast manifestly become a tranquil haven for the tempest-tossed.

The evil-minded one, benighted in mind, strove with foolish arguments to suborn thee who art adorned with the splendors of theology, O wise one; yet he showed himself worthy of ridicule and was filled with shame by thy boldness.

Adorned with most divine inclinations, thy mind was shown to all to be a most radiant star, O right wondrous Andrew, illumining with miracles each of the faithful who praise thee.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the temple of the living God, wherein He Who dwelleth in the heavens made His ineffable habitation, O most hymned Virgin, being pleased to become man in His great goodness.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Hymn the Lord, Who preserved the children in the burning fiery furnace and descended unto them in the guise of an angel, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Incomprehensible gifts were bestowed upon the prophets by the divine Giver: activity and the knowledge of things to come, that they might hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever.

Having acquired a divinely inspired mouth and a tongue of godly eloquence, O Hosea, thou dost hymn the illumining Light of piety, chanting: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Prophesying by thy words and actions, thou dost denounce the adulterous people, O thou who art most rich, teaching them in images to chant: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* God, the co-eternal Word of God, appeared incarnate of the Virgin to those who cry out with faith: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having first mortified the carnal passions by struggles of fasting, O wise one, thou didst suffer mightily, reverently venerating the image of the Savior, the Ever-virgin and the saints.

Those who raged insanely against Christ like savage wild beasts put thee to death, O father; for, dragging thee along as they beat thee, they cast thee into a ravine, manifestly making thee a witness of the Truth.

Thou dost irrigate the faithful with miracles as with water, O most blessed one, dost drive away the spirits of wickedness, and dost wash away infirmities, receiving the grace of healing from Christ our God on high.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more spacious than the heavens, O Virgin, having contained within thy womb God Whom nought can contain. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver those who piously hymn thee from soul-corrupting straights, O pure Mistress.

Ode IX

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O boast of virgins! Rejoice, O all-pure Mother, whom all of us, all creation, do magnify with divine hymns.

Thou didst receive honor as a prophet, O most blessed Hosea, receiving a crown of splendor from God.

Illumined by the light of Christ, O most excellent one, by thy supplications render Him merciful unto all who hymn thee.

Having lived an angelic life, O Hosea, thou standest with the ranks of angels before the Master, praising Him with laudations.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to save man, the Savior and Lord clothed Himself in our flesh through the all-pure Virgin.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us ­incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Behold, O venerable father, finishing thy course thou didst preserve unsullied the Orthodox Faith for which thou didst suffer lawfully, and hast received from on high a twofold crown, as an invincible martyr and an invulnerable ascetic.

Like a sweet-smelling lily, like a rose didst thou manifestly blossom forth in the meadow of divine asceticism, O father; and, filled with light as a martyr, thou dost spread thy fragrance like a cedar, O most lauded Andrew, adornment of monastics.

Manifestly adorned with signs and wonders, thou didst lie, untouched by corruption, before the sight of all, O most blessed Andrew, and dost illumine the souls of those who with ardent faith have recourse to thee and ever bless thee.

Celebrating thy holy memorial today, a festive day full of gladness, we cry out to thee with faith, O father: By thy holy supplications unto God deliver us all from the evil circumstances of life.

*Theotokion:* Thy womb became the dwelling-place of the Light Who illumineth the world with rays of divinity and hath utterly driven the darkness of ignorance away from the earth, O most immaculate Maiden. Wherefore, we glorify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples let us ascend…” —

Let us all praise the right victorious Andrew, celebrating his honored memory in godly manner, that we may be delivered from infirmities; for he hath preached the reverent veneration of the precious images of the Savior and all the saints. Wherefore, receiving a crown in the heavens, he rejoiceth with the angels.

Theotokion —

O ye divinely wise, let us hymn the pure Virgin: the all-holy mountain of God, the candlestand, the jar, the table, the bridge, the staff and the lamp, the divine throne, the portal, the temple and bridal-chamber; for God, becoming incarnate through her immutably and in manner transcending nature, hath by ineffable union deified what He received.

