Also On The 18th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints Peter, Metropolitan Of Montenegro, The Wonderworker

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone VIII —

Let us bless our father, the holy hierarch Peter, whom the Lord set upon a lampstand, that as an adornment of the Church he might illumine Montenegro and all the surrounding parts of Serbia with the rays of his miracles. And crying out to him, let us say: Pray thou to the Lord, that He grant us peace and great mercy!

Of old the prophet said: The righteous man is like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon is he multiplied; and he shall be like a tree which is planted by streams of waters. And thou, O blessed father Peter, didst blossom forth in God-pleasing virtues. Wherefore, calling thee blessed, we pray to thee: With thy supplications overshadow this city, thy flock in Montenegro, and all Orthodox ­Christians!

Having you, O holy hierarchs — newly-revealed Peter, wonderworker of Cetinje, Basil of Ostrog, Stephen of Pipero and Arsenius of Kosierevo, who sanctify our land with your holy relics — standing before the throne of God Almighty, we earnestly entreat you as favorites of God: Preserve your native land and all the Christian people of Serbia!

When the malicious Moslems attacked thy flock, O holy hierarch Peter, strengthened by faith thou didst rout them; and setting Montenegro in goodly order, thou didst give thy realm a firm foundation, which the life-creating Trinity strengthened, preserving its faithful people. By thy supplications ever defend them, for their good and their salvation.

Ever seeking whom to devour, the enemy of the human race incited civil strife and vengeance among thy people, O most sacred father Peter; and, moved to hatred of one another by slanders and violent acts, thy people prepared a great bloodbath, which would have destroyed many of thy children. Then, O valiant pastor, fulfilling the teaching of Christ, Who said: Blessed are the peace-makers, thou didst pacify thy nation with wise admonitions, tearful entreaties and prayers to God. Wherefore, calling thee blessed, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He preserve the Serbian people from the snares of the enemy, establishing among them concord and love, and driving out all malice and pernicious discord.

Let us all praise the holy bishop Peter, the glory of hierarchs, the splendid adornment of the Church of Serbia, the all-wondrous defense of his homeland: for he undertook many labors to defend his flock from enemies visible and invisible, to confirm Orthodoxy, and to illumine his land with the light of the Truth. Wherefore, pondering his angelic life, we cry out to him: Forget not thy native land and the Serbian people, but pray thou with Saints Basil, Stephen, Arsenius, and the other favorites of God, that He save thy servants, who glorify thy most honored repose.

O blessed father Peter, a tempest arose, which threatened thy flock — the French, who desired to conquer thy land; yet by the mercy of the Most High, they were unable to conquer it, and returned empty to their own lands. But, rendering praise to God, thou didst continue to live in thy monastery in the midst of thy children, teaching thy people, and setting in goodly order the realm entrusted thee by God, which do thou preserve by thy supplications, we beseech thee.

Taking the easy yoke of Christ upon thy shoulders, O wonderworker Peter, thou didst bear it with humility of mind, adorning thy soul with fasting, prayer, innocence and the other virtues. Thou didst defend thy realm with great zeal; and bringing peace to thy people, didst confirm its freedom with laws and enlightenment. Wherefore, thy children, magnifying thee, cry out: O most blessed father, pray to Christ God, Who hath glorified thee in the sight of the angels in heaven and of men on earth, that He save our souls!

Glory…, in the same tone —

When after thy many labors and struggles, O holy hierarch Peter, thou didst sense the imminent departure of thy soul, then, loving thy people, thou didst fervently pray for them; and they wept bitterly, crying out: O our great and good master, leave us not orphans, but by thy supplications preserve us from all evil! And we, kissing thine incorrupt relics, beseech thee: O favorite of God, zealous pastor, adornment of hierarchs! Make us pleasing to the all-holy Trinity, Whom thou didst glorify on earth by thy holiness and wisdom, and before Whom thou dost now ever stand, praying for us and for the salvation of the whole Serbian nation, which doth bless thee as the loving master of thy people.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple; and these stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V —

O ye people, come unto Peter, who with his incorrupt relics sanctifieth the capital city of Cetinje; and cry out to him thus: Rejoice, O lamp of Montenegro, which illumineth the whole land, pouring forth streams of grace and imparting healing unto all!

Overshadowing thee, O sacred hierarch Peter, the grace of the Holy Spirit ordained thee to be a soul-saving leader for thy people; and teaching all, as an emulator of the loving-kindness of the Savior, thou didst feed the orphans and widows. And in fasting and great asceticism, thou didst prepare thyself for the heavenly kingdom, which thou didst find as is meet, and where thou dost unceasingly entreat the Lord to save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

What shall we offer thee, O all-blessed hierarch Peter? For thou pourest forth grace in abundance and dost rout those who wage war upon us. And magnifying thee, we cry out to thee: Preserve us from all evils, and by thy supplications obtain peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

Stichera aposticha, in Tone I —

We celebrate thine honored memorial, O God-bearing hierarch Peter, for unto thee hath Christ God given great grace to illumine the faithful, to heal infirmities and expel demons, in that thou didst truly emulate the apostles. Wherefore, falling down before the shrine of thy relics, we say with compunction: O holy hierarch Peter, pray to God, that He have mercy upon our souls!

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Loving Christ from thy childhood, O father Peter, thou didst mortify carnal-mindedness within thyself, striving to make what is baser subject to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be a pure vessel consecrated to God, receiving within thee the myrrh of the Holy Spirit, and wast made a wellspring of miracles. For this cause pray thou for us, that our souls find mercy.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Glorifying His favored one, the Lord commanded that the relics of the holy hierarch Peter, which had lain incorrupt in the grave for four years, be exhumed; and gazing upon them now, we bless our father. By his supplications, O God, have mercy on us!

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

O holy hierarch Peter our father, thou didst reveal the power of the Holy Faith, which preacheth immortality. And seeing thy precious relics to be as full of life as we are, we cry out to thee in supplication: O converser with the angels and instructor of men, guide us also to the glory of God by the path of struggles, and by thine entreaties obtain for us a share in the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

After the Blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII —

Come, O ye Orthodox, and let us solemnly rejoice today, that we may behold the most honored and praiseworthy virtues, labors and struggles of the all-radiant beacon of the land of Montenegro: Peter great among hierarchs, the right laudable pastor and teacher. For the Lord hath made him wondrous among His saints, and hath shown him to us as incorrupt even after four years in the grave. By his supplications, O Christ our God, save Thou our souls. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saints, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: The resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I —

Thou didst love Christ from thy youth, O holy hierarch, and strengthened by His power, by thy prayer and God-pleasing virtues, as with a spear, thou didst fell enemies visible and invisible; and hast been crowned with a glorious wreath of victory by the hand of Christ, the God of all. Wherefore, we cherish thine honored memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Who can describe the multitude of mine impure thoughts and the storm of mine unseemly imaginings, O most immaculate virgin? Who can recount the assaults of mine incorporeal foes and their malice? But by thy supplications, grant me deliverance from them all.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I —

Like the oil of myrrh upon the head, which runneth down upon the beard of Aaron, which runneth down to the fringe of his raiment, and like the dew which cometh down upon the mountains of Sion, so doth the grace of the Holy Spirit, which ever imparteth sweet fragrance to thy body which hath been glorified with incorruption, give drink unto those who with faith have recourse to thy shrine, rejoicing in the Lord Who glorifieth thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the holy hierarch and the hosts on high entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He sanctify us and grant remission of sins unto all of us who glorify thee, and correction of life unto those who with faith and love ever honor thee.

Polyeleos, and this Magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Peter, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever.... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone III —

The Lord, Who dost not deprive those who walk in innocence of any good thing, gave thee grace and glory, O holy hierarch Peter, which thou didst cause to abide in thy land; wherefore, by thy supplications in heaven vouchsafe us everlasting glory, that we may dwell there with thee and all the saints who have been well-pleasing unto God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Virgin, be thou my protection, intercession, help and boast, for thou art the invincible power of the helpless and the hope of the hopeless. Wherefore, calling thee blessed, we ever cry out to thee with the angels: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §11

\(Mt. 5: 14-19\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you: Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

Today we celebrate the most honored solemnity of our father Peter, who for his labors to benefit the people and the Church hath been magnified by God; wherefore, let us bless his most honored memory, that he may gladden our hearts and save our souls by his supplications.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia, in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Thou didst bring the sea together, engulfing proud Pharaoh and his arms, and didst save the people dryshod, O Lord; and Thou didst lead them to the mountain of holiness, and they cried: We sing unto Thee, our God, a hymn of victory, for Thou hast been glorified!

Fleeing to Thee, O most good Jesus, we who are tempest-tossed on the deep of the sea of the passions cry out: Deliver us from the mire of the passions, that in serenity of spirit we may offer hymnody of praise to Thy favored one, whom Thou hast gloriously glorified.

The Lord Who girded the sea with sand, O holy hierarch Peter our father, who wast well-pleasing to Him from thy youth, sent thee to Russia to study, where thou didst live for a short time before returning to thine own land as heir to the hierarch Savva, and He chose thee for the pacification of thy people, who love thee and sing unto thee: Gloriously hast thou been glorified!

The threefold waves of the sea of life did not engulf the ship of salvation, O holy father, but, impelled by the wind of the Spirit of God, thou didst enter the calm harbor of salvation, and wast glorified by the Lord with many miracles.

*Theotokion:* O all-good Mistress, beg for us a sea of tears from thy merciful Son and our God, that having thereby extinguished the furnace of the passions, we may wash the pollution of sins from our souls, and having acquired everlasting salvation, we may chant unto Christ a hymn of victory, in that He hath been glorified.

Ode III

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord; my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies. I am glad in Thy salvation.

Thou didst establish thy heart upon the rock of the commandments of Christ, O holy hierarch Peter, and didst tread the narrow path of sorrows, toiling for the salvation and good estate of thy homeland; wherefore, thou hast received blessed repose, making thine abode with the saints who have been pleasing to God.

O God-bearing hierarch Peter, who endured many tribulations, afflictions and perils, and overcame them all: thou didst save thy flock from enslavement to the Moslems.

Confirmed by the blessing, instruction and prayer of Metropolitan Moses of Serbia, O father, thou wast shown to be a second Moses, saving thy people, whom thou didst love exceedingly.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we know thee to be a firm and steadfast hope, to which we hold; and trusting in thee, we pray: Preserve thou our people, this city, and all cities and lands where Christians dwell, from all the misfortunes which befall sinful men; and by thy supplications may we straightway receive remission of offenses.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III —

Such a high priest was fitting for us: one holy, innocent, meek, separate from sinners, who before Christ Jesus, the eternal High Priest, prayeth continually for the salvation of his flock; for the supplication of a righteous man is able to accomplish much good.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Thy speedy help, protection and mercy do thou show unto thy servants, O pure one, and still thou the waves of vain thoughts. Yea, raise up my fallen soul, O Theotokos, for I know that thou art able to do whatsoever thou desirest, O all-holy Virgin.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming, O Lord; wherefore he cried aloud: “God shall come out of Thæman!” Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

Thou wast resplendent with rays of miracles, O holy hierarch Peter. With the light of thy supplications illumine my heart, which hath been darkened by sin, that I also may hymn thy memory with thanksgiving.

Of old, believers were healed of the misery of mental illnesses by the napkins of Paul; but by thy supplications thou, O father Peter, hierarch of God, givest healing unto those who have recourse to the shrine of thy relics.

The prayer of faith hath saved the grievously ill who confessed that physicians cannot raise from the dead; and trust in thee, O kind-hearted father, never disappointeth those who with faith call upon thee for timely aid.

*Theotokion:* The Lord descended into thy womb like dew upon the fleece, as the prophet said of old, O most immaculate one. To Him do we cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Grant us peace, O Lord our God. O Lord our God, take us for Thy possession. O Lord, we known none other than Thee; we call upon Thy name.

Thou didst sanctify the Lord God within thy soul, O blessed father, and didst make thy soul a noetic altar, whereon thou didst offer to the Lord a sacrifice of praise in humility of spirit, continually calling upon the saving name of God.

As thou didst establish among believers a firm understanding of grace, O holy hierarch Peter, they came to know thee as a merciful instructor, a treasury of loving-kindness, a teacher of Orthodoxy, the boast of hierarchs, the helper of the helpless, who ever prayest for the salvation of thy children who have recourse to thee with faith.

The life-creating commandments of the Lord didst thou have graven upon the tablets of thy heart, O divinely wise father Peter, and thou wast a preacher of the teaching of the Gospel for thy flock, leading to heaven those who, heeding it, call upon the divine name of Christ in prayer.

*Theotokion:* The chains of hades were rent apart, and the everlasting bars were broken asunder by Him Who was born of thee, O all-blessed Mother. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Deliver us from never-ending death by thy mediation, and cause us to dwell in the light of thy Son, Who hath shone forth the light of redemption upon the world.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Like the waters of the sea am I tossed about by the waves of life, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, like Jonah I cry to Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord!

Foreseeing thine all-laudable life and purity, and thy boundless humility of mind, the all-holy Spirit showed thee to be glorious; wherefore, having passed from this life to that which is to come, thou didst receive gladness there with the righteous.

O holy hierarch Peter, celebrating today thy sacred memorial, which gladdeneth thy people, who hymn thy struggles with love and glorify thine honored repose, they pray to thee, that thou preserve them from all misfortunes and perils.

Who can recount the labors and vigils which thou didst undertake for the salvation of thy flock, O divinely wise Peter, and as a reward for which thou didst receive from God after thy death the ability to heal divers sicknesses?

*Theotokion:* Grant me thine aid, O Mother of God and Mistress, and deliver me from all tribulations, sorrows and transgressions, in that thou gavest birth to the Deliverer of all.

Kontakion, in Tone III —

Let us all rejoice today in divine delight, O ye who love the saints, for heaven hath now revealed to us the most miraculous and incorrupt relics of Peter, the hierarch of Christ, the wondrous high priest and initiate of the mysteries of God. Wherefore, in hymns let us magnify the all-radiant star of Montenegro, who hath shone forth upon us today from the grave; and let us entreat him as one who careth greatly and prayeth fervently for our souls, crying out to him and saying with compunction: O Peter, newly revealed among the saints, all-wise and holy hierarch, boast of Montenegro, we whom thou didst tend with thy many labors and struggles beseech thee: Pray thou for all the Orthodox, that our souls may be saved.

*Ikos:* As a faithful disciple of the divine Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, thou didst fulfill all His holy commandments; and following Him, thou didst travel everywhere, seeking help for thy beloved Montenegro. Having visited Vienna and Berlin, thou didst return empty-handed from thence; but thou didst fall down before God, thine almighty Helper, and He strengthened thee to vanquish the Moslems and bring peace to thy people, whom thou didst teach day and night to be faithful to God, and to live with one another in concord and brotherly love, for he who loveth his brother loveth God. Wherefore, having brought order to thy nation and united it, thou wast able to repel the great power of the Moslems, and to win deliverance from all thy many enemies from the West, who sought to ensnare Montenegro by their maleficent machinations. For this cause, blessing thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O holy hierarch Peter, our boast, joy and consolation, who prayest fervently to God for us! Rejoice, O teacher who liftest our eyes up to heaven, where is the dwelling-place of thee and of all who are glad, and who prayest for thy children, that they all may receive everlasting salvation in rightly pleasing God.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Chaldæan furnace, burning with fire, was bedewed by the Spirit through the presence of God; and the children chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst walk freely in the furnace of trials, O blessed Peter our father, for, preserved by the grace of God, thou didst crush all thine enemies, crying out continually: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Emulating the zeal of Peter, the apostle of Christ, O holy hierarch Peter, thou didst do good works; and, seeing them, thy flock glorifieth the God of Israel, Who is wondrous in His saints, and Who worketh miracles through thee.

Heal thou the ailments of our souls, still thou our turmoil, and establish concord among those who are around us, O God, through the supplications of Thy favored one who hath been glorified by Thee, and who hasteneth to the help of us who in the compunction of our souls need help in Thy ­presence.

*Theotokion:* Knowing the mystery of Thy birthgiving to be prefigured in the Chaldæan furnace, O Virgin Theotokos, we have found salvation through the Redeemer Who was born of thee; and like the youths we cry out in thanksgiving to thy Son, our Lord and Savior: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O ye angels and heavens, bless, hymn and exalt supremely Him Who sitteth upon the throne of glory and as God is glorified unceasingly forever!

O holy hierarch Peter, from childhood and youth thou didst strive to present unto God a pure conscience, heart and soul; wherefore, Christ hath glorified thee, and we cry unto Him: Hymn ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

We know thee to be an angel in the flesh, for thou didst zealously preserve the purity of thy soul and body; and thou now dwellest where naught which is impure can enter in, chanting constant hymnody unto God, Who is all-hymned and ­supremely glorified forever.

The Creator of the angels and Author of all creation revealed thee as a lamp of the virtues, O blessed father Peter; and, strengthened by His power, thou didst attain spiritual perfection. Thou hast inherited the kingdom of Christ, and dost joyfully chant with the saints: Hymn ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* With love we offer thee the angelic salutation, O all-pure Theotokos: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee! Vouchsafe joy incorruptible unto those who bless thee as is meet, and who forever hymn and ­supremely exalt the Lord Who was born of thee.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Foreign to mothers is virginity, and strange is childbirth to virgins; yet both were accomplished in thee, O Theotokos. Wherefore, all of us, the peoples of the world, magnify thee unceasingly.

Thou wast foreign to vainglorious arrogance, providing an example of humility, O holy hierarch Peter, that all might flee pride and magnify Christ, the Bestower of life, in humility of spirit.

Ever preserve the people of thy nation, who are buffeted by the passions and founder amid the storm of sin, for thou hast boldness before the Lord; and pray for all who piously hymn and glorify God.

Always alien to idleness, O blessed father Peter, strengthened by the power of the Lord thou didst ever live in prayers, labors and struggles for the good estate and salvation of the people entrusted thee by God, Whom thou didst continually magnify with cries of praise.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, show us to be foreign to the rule of the cruel prince of this earth, and at the hour of our demise haste thou to the aid of us, the helpless; for thy maternal prayer before the Lord is able to accomplish much, and before thee the spirits of darkness tremble. Deliver all thy people from the violence and assaults of the wicked, O most good one, that we may magnify thee with joyful ­glorification.

Exapostilarion —

O divinely wise and holy hierarch Peter, glory of Montenegro! Splendidly celebrating thy memory, we earnestly beseech thee: In faith, love and hope establish all thy people, for whom thou didst labor greatly, that, preserved by these virtues, they may magnify our God for thy life.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Thou didst shine forth light upon the world in thy birthgiving, O all-pure Mother of God; wherefore, illumine our minds with the knowledge of thy Son, and wound our hearts with love for the divine commandments, by thy supplications strengthening us in faith and good works.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone V —

Thy most festive memorial hath dawned more brightly than the sun, O holy hierarch Peter, and thy virtuous deeds shine forth with rays of brilliance, illumining the senses of the faithful with the light of thy miracles. And joyously celebrating it we praise and bless thee with faith.

Rejoice, O sacred leader, dwelling-place of the all-holy Spirit, chosen vessel of the grace of God! Guide us all, that we may tread the path of thy God-pleasing corrections; and mercifully incline thyself to the cries of praise wherewith we honor thy holy memory, O holy hierarch Peter: for thou art the healer of the sick and comforter of the grieving. Remember us all in thy prayers to the Lord, and ask His great mercy for us.

By thine earnest entreaty to God and thine ascetic endeavor thou didst subdue the carnal passions and the enemies of thy realm; by thy tearful struggles thou didst slay the lying serpent, O right wondrous and God-bearing Peter; and more than others it was God Whom thou pleased. And the Lord Jesus, the Savior of our souls, hath adorned thee with heavenly gifts.

Rejoice, thou rule of faith! Rejoice, O blessed hierarch Peter, who didst love the Serbian people! For, illumining thine earthly homeland with miracles, even after thy death thou dost glorify and establish thy people in the Orthodox Faith, healing their infirmities, and praying to Christ God, that He grant great mercy to us all.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone IV —

God Who of old spake to our fathers in the prophets, in latter days hath spoken to us in the Son, Who by grace even to this day speaketh to us in our instructors, who by their manner of life teach us faith and hope, and after their death confirm us in the perfect love which faileth not. By their supplications, O Christ, preserve and save our souls!

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: from Odes III & VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone I —

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews, §318 \(Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\)

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II —

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \(Jn. 10: 9-16\)

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

Communion hymn —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

