The 19th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Prophet Joel

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Varus

\(for this day we provide also the services in honor of St. John of Ryla and St. John of Kronstadt\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the prophet, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

The Spirit of God hath been poured forth upon us, the faithful, as, moved by Him, the honored Joel said in prophecy; And he discloseth the revelation of divine mysteries and doth prophesy. And we who have received His activity are illumined with divine radiance and with the grace of God.

Full of divine eloquence, the wondrous Joel doth issue forth from Thy house like a wellspring watering men’s souls, O Master, and hath let fall upon us the sweetness which delighteth our thoughts, in that he hath been exalted by the Spirit and elevated by virtue to divine heights.

With thy boldness as a prophet and thy noetic closeness to God, O Joel, by which thou seest heavenly visions, move Him to pity for us who with faith celebrate thy memory, O glorious one, asking remission of transgressions, a share in divine delights and great mercy.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside…” —

Beholding the sufferings of the right victorious martyrs, full of divine boldness thou didst enter the arena, O Varus, and didst preach Christ, Who became a man for our sake; and thou wast not afraid of death or the torments that lay before thee. Wherefore, wounded and mercilessly dismembered, thou didst rejoice with perfect understanding, O wise one, looking toward the glory which abideth for those who love God.

Seeing thy flesh and blood falling away, O athlete, thou didst most valiantly endure, as though another were suffering in thy stead. Bound to a tree, thou didst endure the laceration of the iniquitous most patiently; and thou didst commit thy spirit into the hands of God, astonishing those who beheld thee with thy steadfast opposition. Wherefore, we honor thee, O wise Varus, whose courage was so great, and who cast down the tyrant with thy pangs.

The wondrous Cleopatra, having embalmed thee with spices, interred thee in the earth, and raised up to thee a holy church, celebrating thy feast, O wondrous Varus, and entreating thee with faith. Her children thou didst enroll in the noetic army, didst adorn with glory and number among the choirs of the saints, whose portion do thou vouchsafe also unto us who piously celebrate thy festival, O right wondrous martyr.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

Rejoice, O root bedewed! Rejoice, O staff of Aaron who budded forth the never-fading and ever-living Flower, O pure Maiden, thou right fruitful garden who shone forth from the root of Jesse the Tree of life, and dost nurture mortals with noetic bread! Rejoice, O most precious robe of purple, Bride of God, the King of heaven, most radiant crown, adornment of hierarchs! Rejoice, thou who alone art most pure!

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody —

When the unblemished Ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld of old her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried out: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that the thankless assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemneth to death the Life of all? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV —

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Varus received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at nought the tormenters, and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “I marvel at the prophecies of the Prophet Joel”, the composition of Theophanes,

in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

The choir of the prophets rejoiceth with us when thou who hast heavenly wisdom art praised, O divinely eloquent Joel. With them pray thou that we be saved, O blessed one.

Announcing beforehand the words of God, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst foretell the grievous and righteous wrath which would befall thy vain-minded people because of their ungodliness.

The wondrous, radiant and life-creating inspiration of the Spirit overshadowed thee, O most blessed prophet, and breathed into thee the knowledge of things to come.

*Theotokion:* The tabernacle of witness prefigured thee who art signified in manifold ways, revealing Him Who became incarnate of thee immutably, O all-pure Mistress, Mother of God.

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the sufferings of Varus and his great glory”, the composition of Joseph,

in Tone VI —

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Thou hast appeared in the heights of the Church of Christ as a radiant sun, illumining the fullness of the earth with the brilliance of thy contests, O blessed Varus.

Embraced by the sweet ardor of divine love, O most blessed one, thou didst deny thyself and didst hasten wisely to all the tortures of the flesh, struggling mightily.

Having sensibly bound thyself with the bonds of godly strugglers, O athlete, thou didst break asunder the bonds of falsehood by thy mighty endurance of many torments.

*Theotokion:* The transcendent Word made His abode within thy womb in manner past recounting, O pure one, and, having been born in godly manner, He hath led to Him the choirs of martyrs, with whom we praise thee in hymnody.

Ode III

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Taught by thy wise dogmas, O prophet, we piously preach fasting and ministry, proceeding to the house of the Lord.

Following thy teachings with all our heart and mind, we weep and seek out God in supplication, O right laudable one.

Revealing to us the long-suffering of the most compassionate Master, O prophet, thou hast also made plain His divine goodness and grace.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou didst conceive God and gavest birth ineffably to the Word incarnate, Who spake in the prophets and hath fulfilled that which they foretold.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Thou didst undertake valiant struggles with mighty resolve, having made thyself steadfast by hope in the good things which are to come and by the most wise teachings of the martyrs of Christ, O blessed one.

Beholding the army of the holy athletes suffering lawfully, thou didst show forth their courageous strength, entering upon multifarious torments, O Varus.

As a valiant warrior, O Varus, thou didst find thyself in the sacred regiment, and didst cut down multitudes with the battle-sword of courage, O wise one, being glorified with victories.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, I beseech thee: By the effulgence of grace which is in thee, drive away the most profound darkness of my despair and the clouds of the passions.

Sessional hymn of the prophet, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O athletes of the Lord…” —

O divinely eloquent prophet, filled with the inspiration of the Comforter, thou didst reveal the enlightenment of the nations which would take place in later times. Wherefore, we now piously praise thee, and, celebrating thy memory, cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God in behalf of our souls!

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

Beholding the honored sufferings of the martyrs, and venerating their fetters with love, thou didst hasten to ascend to the summit of witness, O most wondrous one; for, suspended upon a tree, thou didst endure wounds, until thou didst commit thy spirit into the hands of the Lord.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Virgin, thou hope of Christians, unceasingly entreat God to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, in behalf of those who hymn thee, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee stretched out, dead, upon the Cross, O Christ, Thy most immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son Who with the Father and the Spirit art equally without beginning, what is this, Thine ineffable dispensation, whereby Thou hast saved the creation of Thine own all-pure hands, O Compassionate One?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

O Lord, be Thou merciful unto those who offer Thee pure repentance, for Thou alone art compassionate and greatly merciful.

As thou didst proclaim, O glorious one, the Spirit hath been poured forth from God upon the flesh of all who believe.

The descent of the Spirit which made wise the disciples of the Lord filled thy divinely uttered words.

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thy divine birthgiving from the dark maw of hades, O all-pure one, we call thee blessed.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Adorned with holy wounds, thou didst show thyself to be most comely and the beloved of God Who crowned thy head, O right wondrous Varus.

Stretched out on a cross and again upon the ground, O glorious one, thou didst endure grievous pangs. Wherefore, in gladness thou hast inherited the life which is devoid of pain.

Seeing thee suffering lawfully, the godly martyrs strengthened thee with words of patience, O blessed one; and having completed thy valiant sufferings with them, thou hast attained blessedness.

With praises we crown the divine martyrs, for with divine wreaths the grace of God hath crowned those who cast down the overweening thoughts of the enemy.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, from the mire of the passions and the passionate thoughts which alienate me from the one pure God lead me up, that I may bless thee with faith.

Ode V

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Night hath passed; the day hath drawn nigh, and light hath shone upon the world. Wherefore, the ranks of angels praise Thee, and all things glorify Thee.

The godly Joel hath manifestly foretold to all the coming of Christ, that He would come and save the human race from the delusion of idolatry.

Having penetrated wholly into the light which passeth understanding and transcendeth the mind of man, O glorious prophet, thou didst draw forth the grace of prophecy therefrom and didst preach righteousness.

Pray thou for those who hymn thee, O Joel who art most rich, and make entreaty, that they be saved from all tribulation and be vouchsafed divine grace and radiance.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Virgin, Mistress of the world, pray thou that those who confess thee to be the Theotokos be saved from countless sins and the evil circumstances of life.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Strengthened by divine inclinations, O Varus, with valiant resolve thou didst endure unremitting laceration, rending apart the heart of the prideful one, the author of evil.

The glorious martyr, seeing pieces of his flesh falling to the ground, rejoiced, looking toward eternal and divine rewards with splendor of mind.

“I hymn, glorify and worship Thee, O Lord God, for I shall be vouchsafed the good things prepared for those who love Thee!” the martyr cried out fervently amid his suffering.

*Theotokion:* In that thou hast truly been shown to be more holy than the cherubim and seraphim, O most immaculate one, do thou now sanctify all who with faith call thee sacred, and save them by thy mediation.

Ode VI

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The great abyss of sin encompasseth me, and, emulating the prophet, I cry to thee: Lead me up from corruption, O Lord!

The wellsprings of thy words drop forth divine proclamation, O glorious one, pouring forth spiritually nourishing sweetness which watereth those who approach with faith.

We know thee, O divinely eloquent Prophet Joel, as a mountain of prophecy pouring forth delight, and a most wise preacher of piety.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mistress, who gavest birth to the never-waning Light, illumine the hearts of those who with faith glorify thee and Him Who was ineffably born of thee.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thou didst disdain the words of the all-iniquitous foe and didst patiently endure unbearable pain amid the flames, O much suffering Varus, who prayest for those who praise thee with faith.

The most mindless tyrant did not cease inflicting wounds upon thee without pity, until thou didst commit thy sacred soul into the hands of God, rendered radiant with the beauties of thy struggles.

Emulating Christ, thou wast uplifted upon a tree, and hanging thereon, thou didst surrender thy soul to God Who crowned thee, having suffered valiantly, O athlete.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, ever direct my lowly soul which is tempest-tossed on the deep of evils, and guide it to the calm haven, for with unwavering understanding it calleth thee blessed.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone IV —

Following Christ, O martyr Varus, and draining His cup, thou wast crowned with the wreath of martyrdom and joinest chorus with the angels. Pray thou without ceasing for our souls.

Ode VII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who of old extinguished the thunderous furnace and bedewed the children by an outpouring of the Spirit.

As thou didst foretell, O most honored prophet, a spring of water hath come forth, issuing from the house of the Lord.

As the Prophet Joel foretold, Thou hast made a satisfying torrent, a nourishing stream bearing grain. Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* He Who hath created all things, being born of the Virgin, hath saved the world, which piously chanteth: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O Varus, the all-good Cleopatra helped to bury thee, who wast illumined with gifts of thy struggles, finding through thee the glory of faith manifestly fitting, which thou didst fervently show forth in thine end.

Shedding tears over thee and embalming thee with precious unguents, the most honored woman buried in the earth thee who buried wicked falsehood and hast illumined us with rays of brilliance from thy grave.

The ever-memorable one did not cease pleasing thee, the favorite of Christ, O wise and venerable one, until thou didst show thyself to be a mediator for her of the kingdom of heaven, which she and her beloved son were vouchsafed through thee.

*Theotokion:* By thy mediation, restore me, who am crushed by my countless offenses, O Virgin, healing my soul and granting me the words to cry out: Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* We hymn the Lord, Who of old bedewed the Hebrew children in the flame and all-gloriously consumed the Chaldæans therein, saying: Bless and exalt Him supremely forever!

By images of repentance, O glorious one, thou didst manifestly show forth the compassionate Lord Who accepteth those who approach Him with faith and cry out: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

As a servant of the Lord, O Prophet Joel, thou wast entrusted with the task of proclaiming His mysteries to the people who utter praise and chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

As Joel prophesied, rivers of miracles, which are the all-glorious apostles of the Lord, pour forth remission upon Judah, watering those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, while thou didst remain a pure Virgin, thou gavest birth to Christ, the single Hypostasis composed of two natures; and chanting to Him, we cry out: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Hearkening to a mother’s entreaties, O martyr, and splendidly enrolling her son in the army of heaven, with ineffable loving-kindness thou didst show that thy glory and that of the honored youth cannot be taken away.

Cleopatra bore thee out of Egypt like riches beyond price, O martyr, lavishing precious gifts of healings upon all of Palestine, which honoreth thee with love.

In gladness thou didst complete thy struggles, O valiant warrior of the Almighty, and thou hast been crowned by Him as a victor, O most blessed Varus, thou great glory of the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Sins upon sins do I compound, yet I do not fear the coming dread judgment. O pure one, overcome the blindness of my soul, and converting me, save me by thine entreaty.

Ode IX

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O unwedded Bride, who art blessed in the heavens and glorified on earth!

As a prophet thou dost now dwell joyously with the prophets in the mansions of heavens.

From on high thou dost now watch over us who reverently glorify thee, O divinely eloquent one who art most rich.

Through repentance Joel hath shown forth the short path of salvation with divine wisdom.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the compassionate Master and Savior, O Mother of God, thou hast led us up who are fallen.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Manifestly girded about with divine power, O valiant athlete Varus, thou didst cast down the might of the adversary; wherefore, we, the faithful, praise thee, drawing forth abundant healing from thy relics.

Thy memory hath spread forth upon the ends of the earth like light, like the dawn, like the great sun, O all-praised one, illumining all with the radiant effulgence of thine honored struggles and driving darkness away from men’s hearts.

The loving mother, beholding her son shining with thee in great glory, magnified the God of all, O martyr, and most earnestly glorified thee as an intercessor most great, having been manifestly enriched by thee.

The land on which thy most patient body lieth, O wise one, hath been divinely sanctified. By thy supplications, O Varus, grant us remission of sins, amendment of life and deliverance from all difficulties.

*Theotokion:* The Lord, manifesting Himself through thee, the light cloud, O Virgin, wrought utter destruction upon the graven images of Egypt; and He hath vouchsafed the multitude of His athletes to endure, becoming emulators of His honored sufferings.

