Also On The 19th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of Our Father John Of Kronstadt, The Wonderworker

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone II —

“O Jesus, Son of God, my strength! O Light of my mind, Thou peace and joy of my heart: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee Who dost deliver me from my invisible enemies!” didst thou cry aloud, O John. Thus do thou also teach us to hymn the Lord with all our heart, O righteous John, servant of Christ. *Twice*

Incarnate, Christ called thieves and harlots to repentance, and thou, O merciful pastor, fulfilling the commandment of the Chief Shepherd, ate with publicans and conversed with sinners, calling all to repentance and teaching all to pray: O God, be merciful to me, a sinner! O merciful God, glory to Thee!

“Ye are the image of God, wherefore preserve ye this great image, the image of God’s beauty, the image of His boundless love, that ye may be children of our Father Who is in heaven, that ye may be holy as your Father is holy.” Thus, O divinely wise pastor, didst thou instruct thy flock, and thus didst thou thyself live in holy manner.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

Never hath thy love failed, O merciful father John of Kronstadt. Thou art our hope for correction of life, our pastoral protector, a generous benefactor, our hope, O righteous John.

Now & ever..., in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplication of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV —

Thou didst belong to the Lord from thine infancy, acquiring the sense of a grown man in thy childhood, desiring the wisdom of God; and thou wast wholly a dwelling place of God, O gracious John, our father.

*Stichos:* He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages.

Standing before the Holy Trinity with a mind illumined by grace, O blessed John, with heavenly rays thou hast illumined those who lie in the darkness of sin. Enlighten us also with the light of thy divine vision.

*Stichos:* His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

Light unapproachable abode within thee, O righteous father, and the Lord set thee as a lamp amid the darkness of sin. Wherefore, instructed by thee, we hymn thy gracious memory, O John.

Glory..., in Tone VI —

O Lord, Who didst bind Thine apostles with the bond of love, and hast appointed our father John as a new herald of Thy love: Establish even now the Church’s bond of love, O our Savior, that united we may hymn Thee and Thine ineffable goodness.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone —

No one that who recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

With the apostles thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth; with the confessors thou didst endure sufferings for Christ; thou didst resemble the holy hierarchs in thy preaching of the Word; and with the venerable hast thou shone forth in the grace of God. Therefore, the Lord hath exalted the depths of thy humility above the heavens, and hath given us thy name as a source of most wondrous miracles. Wherefore, O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; and hearken unto thy children, who with faith call upon thee, O righteous John, our beloved pastor.

Or this Troparion, in Tone IV —

O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; hearken unto thy children who with faith call upon thee, expecting compassionate aid from thee, O John of Kronstadt, our beloved pastor.

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

Litany and Dismissal.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

At “Lord, I have cried...:” 8 stichera, in Tone VI, Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside...” —

Having set aside all the things of this world, with one voice let us praise the wondrous beacon of the land of Russia and of the whole world, the good shepherd, the priest John, who hath given us a splendid model of life in Christ, who on earth was aflame with the spirit of prayer, and who received from the Lord a twofold gift of healing. Through his prayers may Christ strengthen us in piety and show us to be steadfast children of the Church, for the salvation of our souls. *Twice*

With all thy heart and mind, O blessed John, thou didst love the life in Christ. Thinking and doing all things to please God, thy labors bore fruit abundantly through the grace of the priesthood, and at the Lord’s Supper, as if in heaven, with enraptured spirit thou didst stand at the altar of the Lord from day to day with tears of compunction. And now, standing before the Holy Trinity in the highest, offer up prayers, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

By the path of spiritual vigilance, reverence, contemplation of the mysteries of God, amendment of soul, and rest in God, thou didst attain unto the heavenly bridal chamber. By acts of mercy and thy miracles the Church is adorned, by the purity of thy life impiety is put to shame, and by the words of thy writings the Faith is confirmed. Wherefore, we entreat thee, O most honored John: Be thou our guide amid all our circumstances, that guided and guarded by thee, we may be vouchsafed the kingdom of heaven.

Travailing with all thy heart over the darkness of the nations, thou didst at first think to go to the lands of the East. But, beholding Kronstadt, which was far nearer, perishing, thou didst submit to the call from on high, which came once during sleep through a vision of a temple, O righteous John. “I know,” thou didst say, “the loftiness of the priesthood, yet I hope in God; for I know that He is my strength.” O, the divine power of love, which doth draw us to Christ and strengthen us! *Twice*

Making room for all in thy pastoral heart, and constrained by the wounds inflicted upon the poor by poverty, thou didst call all people by thy words and by thy writings, to build a house of industry, wherein the poor might find refuge. O teacher of good deeds worked through faith! O nurturer of the souls and bodies of the poor! O John, joy of those who before were in despair! Thy care for such here on earth was a likeness of thine intercession now in heaven.

Having acquired boldness in prayer, with a heart open to all, full of compassion, even after thy death thou dost not cease to offer it up. And growing eternally richer in love, thou dost ever pour forth healings and consolation, O John, joyful and speedy helper. O thou who didst heal through the laying on of thy hand, knowing the needs of those who asked before a word was uttered, intercede now invisibly for us who hymn thee as one who liveth in Christ, awaiting thy help and assistance.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

Thou didst believe in righteousness with thy whole heart, O priest of God, and with thy lips thou didst speak unto salvation: The Lord is my being; the Lord is my deliverance from everlasting death; the Lord is my eternal life; the Lord is my purification, my deliverance and sanctification; the Lord is my strength in weakness, my freedom when I am straightened, my light amid darkness, my peace amid confusion! Glory to Thee, O my Savior, almighty power! Glory to Thee, O Savior, omnipresent power! Glory to Thee, most kind-hearted Compassion! Glory to Thee, Power ever open to my prayers! Glory to Thee, brightest Eye which ever regardest me and beholdest all my hidden things! Wherefore, O holy John, following after thee we also cry out to the Lord: Glory to Thee, O our God, wondrous in Thy saints whose teachings show forth Thy wonder! Glory to Thee!

Now & ever..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII —

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. And three Readings:

Reading from the Prophecy of Joel \(2:12-27\).

Thus saith the Lord: Turn to Me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with lamentation: and rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God: for He is merciful and compassionate, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy, and repenteth of evils. Who knoweth if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat-offering and a drink-offering to the Lord your God? Sound the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, proclaim a solemn service: gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the infants at the breast; let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Between the porch and the altar let the priests that minister to the Lord weep and say: Spare Thy people, O Lord, and give not Thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them, lest they should say among the heathen: Where is their God? But the Lord was jealous of His land, and spared His people. And the Lord answered and said to His people: Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied with them: and I will no longer make you a reproach among the gentiles. And I will chase away from you the northern adversary, and will drive him into the dry land, and I will sink his face in the former sea, and his back parts in the latter sea, and his ill savor shall come up, and his stink shall come up, because he hath wrought great things. Be of good courage, O land; rejoice and be glad: for the Lord hath done great things. Be of good courage, ye beasts of the plain, for the plains of the wilderness have budded, for the trees have borne their fruit, the fig tree and the vine have yielded their strength. Rejoice then and be glad, ye children of Sion, in the Lord your God: for He hath given you food fully, and He will rain on you the early and the latter rain, as before. And the floors shall be filled with corn, and the presses shall overflow with wine and oil. And I will recompense you for the years which the locust, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, and the cankerworm have eaten, even My great army, which I sent against you. And ye shall eat abundantly, and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the Lord your God for the things which He hath wrought wonderfully with you: and My people shall not be ashamed forever. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and that there is none else beside Me: and My people shall no more be ashamed forever.

Reading from the Prophecy of Joel \(2:27-32\).

Thus saith the Lord: Ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and that there is none else beside Me: and My people shall no more be ashamed forever. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. And on My servants and on My handmaids in those days will I pour out of My Spirit. And I will show wonders in heaven and upon the earth: blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Reading from the First Epistle General of John \(4:20-5:5\).

Beloved, if a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth him who begat, loveth him also that is begotten of Him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments: and His commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone II —

“O Jesus, Son of God, my strength! O Light of my mind, Thou peace and joy of my heart: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee Who dost deliver me from mine invisible enemies!” didst thou cry aloud, O John. Thus do thou also teach us to hymn the Lord with all our heart, O righteous John, servant of Christ.

Incarnate, Christ called thieves and harlots to repentance; and thou, O merciful pastor, fulfilling the commandment of the Chief Shepherd, ate with publicans and conversed with sinners, calling all to repentance and teaching all to pray: O God, be merciful to me, a sinner! O merciful God, glory to Thee!

“Ye are the image of God; wherefore preserve ye this great image, the image of God’s beauty, the image of His boundless love, that ye may be children of our Father Who is in heaven, that ye may be holy as your Father is holy.” Thus, O divinely wise pastor, didst thou instruct thy flock, and thus didst thou thyself live in holy manner.

Glory..., in Tone I —

“When we pray, we pray through the Holy Spirit; wherefore, all the prayers of the Church are the breathing of the Holy Spirit, and all we Christians are His offspring. Come, therefore, and abide in us, O Holy Spirit! Have mercy on us and renew us all, that we may be the one Body of Christ.” Such was thine unceasing prayer, O most wondrous John our father, and God hearkened unto thee and anointed thee with the oil of eternal joy.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone —

We see thee as the resplendent dawn of the unwaning Light, O Virgin; for He Who dispelled the darkness of sin came forth from thee, reviving our hearts with the fervor of the Spirit. We beseech thee: Cease not to pray earnestly to Him on behalf of us that confess thee to be the true Theotokos.

At the Aposticha: the Typicon indicates: Aposticha of the holy and righteous John, Glory..., of St. Ignatius, Now & ever..., of the Forefeast. However complete stichera for the Forefeast are given as well, as below.

Stichera of St. John, in Tone VI —

O most blessed father John, being an emulator of all the saints, thou didst acquire the holy faith of the patriarchs, the zeal of the prophets and the apostles, the sanctity and godly-mindedness of the holy hierarchs, the boldness of the confessors, the freely-given aid of the unmercenary healers, the unceasing prayer of the venerable. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy memory with splendor.

*Stichos:* He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages.

O divinely wise father John, having begun with the fear of God, in understanding thou didst reach the heights of wisdom. And being crucified with Christ by love, having become His very own, thou didst later drive out the fear by love; for fear hath torment, as the Apostle of love hath taught us. Wherefore, O father, thou didst adorn the minds of the faithful and didst teach thy flock to love God. O John, entreat Christ our God, that He grant us also this grace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

The Lord is the strength of my heart, the Lord is the light of my mind, the Lord is my rest and my joy, my faith, hope and love; He is my food and drink, my vesture and protection. Teach us also, O holy father, to understand these words and to place our salvation in the Lord. Grant us of thy goodness, as Elijah granted to Elisha, that all our hope and steadfastness may be in the Lord.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

It was not our fathers that told us, nor our elders that informed us, but we ourselves have seen the miracles that have taken place through thee; we ourselves have experienced the grace that doth pour forth from thee. Our loved ones were healed, those who were dying rose from bed in good health, our every petition was granted through thy prayer. Wherefore, we honor thee as a favorite of God and an intercessor before the Lord.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone —

Thou hast been exalted above all creatures, O Virgin Theotokos, for He that dwelleth in the highest chose thee to be His habitation, that He might raise up our fallen nature. Wherefore, we fall down before thee, as the Mother of our Savior. Thou art our hope, thou art our confidence. Reject us not that seek thine aid.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

With the apostles thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth; with the confessors thou didst endure sufferings for Christ; thou didst resemble the holy hierarchs in thy preaching of the Word; and with the venerable hast thou shone forth in the grace of God. Therefore, the Lord hath exalted the depths of thy humility above the heavens, and hath given us thy name as a source of most wondrous miracles. Wherefore, O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; and hearken unto thy children, who with faith call upon thee, O righteous John, our beloved pastor.

Or this Troparion, in Tone IV —

O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; hearken unto thy children who with faith call upon thee, expecting compassionate aid from thee, O John of Kronstadt, our beloved pastor.

If there be a vigil, this troparion, Twice, and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice...,” once.

At Matins

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Thou didst despise neither stranger nor sojourner, O father John, but wast kind and merciful and compassionate unto all: a father for orphans and a defender for widows, vesture for the naked and food for the hungry. Remember us also, thy poor children, and deny us not thy gracious love.

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone, Spec. Melody —

Joseph marvelled, beholding that which transcendeth nature, and pondering thy seedless conception he dwelt in thought upon the dew which fell upon the fleece, the bush unconsumed by the fire, and the rod of Aaron which put forth branches. And thy guardian and betrothed cried out to the priests: “The Virgin giveth birth, and even after birthgiving remaineth virgin!”

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone V —

Strengthened by divine power, thou didst overcome the temptations of the invisible foe and hast passed on to the unwaning light. Heal thou the sufferings of our souls and direct us by thy counsel, for thou hast been given by God to all as a physician and comforter, O John, our father.

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion —

O Theotokos, bride who knewest not wedlock, who hast transformed the grief of Eve into joy, we the faithful hymn and bow down before thee, for thou hast delivered us from the ancient curse. Pray now for us unceasingly, O all-hymned one, that we may be saved.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. \[111: 1\]

B In His commandments shall he greatly delight. \[111: 1\]

A His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. \[111: 2\]

B And his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[111: 3\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[111: 6\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[63: 11\]

B Lo, my lips I shall not restrain, O Lord. \[39: 10\]

A Thou hast understood My righteousness and My truth.

B And my tongue shall treat of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. \[Ps. 34: 28\]

A A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

B The generation of the upright shall be blessed. \[Ps. 111: 2\]

A With glory and honor hast Thou crowned him. \[Ps. 8: 6\]

B For Thou shalt bless the righteous, O Lord. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

A As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

B Whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us. \[Lk. 1: 78\]

A To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. \[Lk 1: 79\]

B To guide our feet into the way of peace. \[Lk. 1: 79\]

Glory…, Now & Ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

A fiery minister of the Word of God and a vessel of faith wast thou, O divinely inspired John; wherefore, the Lord appointed thee a new Abraham, a father of many. Pray thou therefore, O holy father, that we all may be children of God and that our souls may be saved.

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Virgin, we call thee the portal of heaven, the tabernacle, the all-holy mountain, the luminous cloud, the ladder of heaven, the paradise of the Word, the deliverance of Eve and the great treasure of all the universe; for in thee hath salvation and the remission of the ancient transgression been wrought in the world. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Beseech thy Son and God, that He grant remission of transgressions to those who piously worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Songs of Ascent, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.

Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord.

The Gospel according to Matthew, § 43 \[Matt. 11:27-30\] .

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of my Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

O earthly angel, friend of men, instrument of the Spirit Comforter, bearer of the love of Christ, griever over all the world and mouth of all the faithful, consolation of the grieving and sorrowful, help of the persecuted, physician of our souls and bodies, father and intercessor, holy and righteous John: come thou and stand with us, that with thee we may offer up praise and thanksgiving unto God the Savior, performing this great solemnity.

Canon of the all-holy Theotokos \(the Paraclysis\), with 6 troparia, and that of the saint, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “My life is in Christ, to Whom I chant for all ages,” in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Make firm my senses and mind, O my Savior, that I may be able worthily to hymn the supplications and struggles of Thy servant John our father, who loved Thee and was beloved of Thee.

O blessed one who from thy youth wast forechosen to chant unto the first-called apostle in his holy temple, illumined with the radiance of the Cross thou didst flee the gloom of sin, unceasingly offering up prayers and hymnody to God our Savior.

On a chariot of the virtues didst thou mount to heaven, as did Elijah on a chariot of fire; wherefore, beseech thou the Lord, that He send down upon us correction of life.

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O Virgin Theotokos, have we received everlasting life who once were deprived of life in paradise; for thou gavest birth unto Him Who alone is without beginning and giveth life unto all.

Katavasia: I will open my mouth…

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

One who shared in the manner of life of the apostles and an emulator of their life wast thou, O divinely inspired one, and thou didst set forth the word of truth unto the end.

The eye of thy soul beheld the kingdom of heaven, for it was pure; wherefore, thou didst splendidly set forth thy life, and, honoring it in God, we glorify thee.

Let him who doth not labor not eat! These words of the Apostle Paul didst thou proclaim to thy brethren; wherefore, thou didst raise up a house of industry for the sake of the poor, wherein the impoverished and ailing might be provided for, being sustained by the work of their own hands.

*Theotokion:* Thou art wholly light, all goodness, all wisdom; thou canst, as Mother of the Almighty, do all things; thou alone art all-perfect, in that thou art the Mother of the all-perfect King of glory.

After the Little Litany, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

O blessed John, lamp of Kronstadt, thou whose activity and preaching were continual, who didst offer up before the throne of the Most High lamentation over the sins of many, and who in the Spirit didst behold the bowing down of the heavens at the holy liturgy: Pray thou in behalf of our souls!

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O all-pure one, thou art an immovable foundation and divine gift for our souls; wherefore, falling down before thee we cry out with the Archangel to thee: Rejoice, thou who gavest birth unto our Savior! Rejoice, helper and mediatress for the Christian race!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having a firm foundation in Christ, thou didst emulate Abraham of old in thy hospitality, receiving those who came to thee from all lands, and leading them to the Lord; and thus didst thou do what is pleasing unto God.

Desiring to make of thy heart a temple of God, it was thy wish to serve unceasingly in the house of God, adorning thy soul with the beauties of heaven.

Having quenched all the passions of the body with the dew of thy feats, thou didst kindle the light of dispassion; wherefore, thou wast shown also to be a child of the everlasting day, O blessed father.

*Theotokion:* The divine Ezekiel, O all-pure one, called thee prophetically the gate which was closed, through which He Who alone is preëternal hath passed without change, granting His peace.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Unceasingly serving thy Lord and ever emulating the labors of the apostles, O father, thou wast vouchsafed heavenly gifts.

Having slain the passionate pleasures of thy corruptible flesh, thou didst enliven thine incorruptible soul with piety and didst make of it a house of the divine Spirit.

Earnestly proclaiming the Gospel of Christ unto all, thou wast a daily communicant at the banquet of the Lord, making thyself and thy flock a living offering which was holy in God’s sight.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou gavest birth unto One of the Trinity, Who, for the sake of His loving-kindness, appeared on earth in two natures; Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He save our souls.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thou wast a fruitful olive tree in the house of thy Lord, O divinely manifest John, for the Lord imparted divine knowledge unto thee and strengthened thee in thine apostolic work.

Ye are the members of the body of Christ! Thus, with the Apostle Paul didst thou preach, and didst teach thy flock to love Christ alone, that all may be one.

Thy life is holy, thy discourse, O divinely wise one, was filled with the grace of God, and thy heart became a vessel of grace-filled prayer. Wherefore, with faith and love we honor thee.

*Theotokion:* The angelic nature marvelled at the ineffable wonder which took place within thee, O all-holy Virgin; how He Who is incorporeal and sustaineth all things took flesh of thee.

Kontakion, in Tone IV —

O father John, namesake of grace, who wast chosen by God from childhood, who in thy youth miraculously received from Him the gift of learning, and in a dream wast most gloriously called to be a priest: Entreat Christ God, that we may all abide with thee in the kingdom of heaven.

*Ikos:* The Holy Spirit Who spake in the prophets and enlightened the whole world through the apostles, Who gave strength to the martyrs and made clear the Orthodox Faith through the holy hierarchs, poured forth His grace abundantly upon thee, O father John; for by thy discourse, by thy works and thy whole life thou didst proclaim the faith of Christ. Wherefore, the Lord hath summoned thee to His habitations; and as thou standest now before the throne of His glory, pray thou that all who honor thee may abide with thee in the kingdom of God.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

By the providence of God wast thou shown to be a light of piety amid the heavy darkness of godlessness and unbelief, O father, calling upon all to cry out: Blessed art Thou in the churches of Thy glory, O Lord!

Man is in the image of God; and thou, O father John, wast a most splendid mirror of the love of God and a dwelling place of the Holy Trinity, Whom we sinners also glorify.

From the Lord didst thou receive the grace to heal the infirmities and passions of men; visit us also therewith always, that with thee we may all chant in oneness of mind: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, for ever!

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, save thy people, save those who are of the same blood as thee! Save us, O Mother of Life and of the whole human race, and, even though we are unworthy to call thee our mother, sanctify, make steadfast and save us by thy supplications.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Cleanse our hearts and thoughts by thy supplications, and show us forth to be fertile ground, that, girded about with virtue, we may cry out: Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast crowned with a wreath of the gifts of grace, contemplating heavenly wisdom and ever crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Triadicon Glory to Thee, O all-holy, life-creating Spirit, Who proceedest from the Father and ever restest in the Son! Glory to Thee, O Son of God, Who sanctifiest through the Holy Spirit, and strengthenest and makest us wise! Glory to Thee, O Father, Who art ever well pleased with us through the Holy Spirit! O indivisible Triune Unity, have mercy upon us!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to the salvation of the world, for through thee have we been taken up from earth to heaven! Rejoice, O blessed one, thou protection and dominion, rampart and foundation of those who chant: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for ever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Truly thou wast a light to the world, O holy father, for, having adorned thy soul with godly works, thou wast shown to be an eminent pastor of the Orthodox Church, being a model for the faithful in word and life; wherefore, we bless thee.

Keeping ever before thy mind the one Creator, through Whom and in Whom all things exist, with a pure heart and guileless soul thou didst labor for Him all thy life as for thy Lord; and thou wast in no wise in bondage to Mammon.

Princes praised thee and many people glorified thee; but, disdaining earthly glory, thou didst desire to be in the eternal mansions of God, there to glorify the Lord for ever.

*Theotokion:* He Who is preëternal descended into thy womb, O all-holy Virgin, and ineffably, in manner transcending comprehension and recounting, was born of thee, that He might renew Adam of old; wherefore, we ever magnify thee as the cause of our renewal.

Exapostilarion —

Performing thy priestly ministry in the temple of the first-called of Christ, and zealously emulating his apostolic service of faith, thou wast a good laborer of the garden of Christ, and didst bring the faithful to the Lord like a bountiful harvest, ever proclaiming throughout thy whole life: My life is in Christ!

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion —

He Who was born of thee, O all-holy Virgin, and hath poured forth His Spirit upon all flesh, sanctified, glorified and received into His mansions His faithful servant, intercessor and prophet; with him cease thou never to pray for those who honor thee.

At the Praises: 4 stichera, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “O all-glorious wonder...” —

O most joyous tidings! The child John entreateth God, asking God’s mercy, that He enlighten his mind. He casteth himself down before the icon, confessing to God the sorrow of his heart. And, lo! the bindings fall from the eyes of the child’s mind, and the boy is illumined with the light of Christ, that he might do mighty things and teach many. *Twice*

O abundance of wonders! O living splendor of love! Who will not marvel at thy beneficence and thy loving-kindness toward the destitute? In the countless number of thy miracles thou wast like the glorious and holy hierarch of Myra in Lycia. Wherefore, the cities and villages of the land of Russia, O righteous John, through thee beheld the light of Christ.

As light and warmth cannot be separated from the sun, so in thee sanctity and learning, love and compassion were present, O most sacred John, who wast given by God to the people. Wherefore, O pastor, warm us and enlighten us; be thou like the sun unto our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VII —

“Bowing down before the holy icons, I glorify Christ, God incarnate, the image of the glory of the Father. I confess the Father, Who begat the Son without beginning. I glorify the divine likeness of men, who are temples of the Holy Spirit. And beholding the image of the Cross, I sense the power of the Cross.” Behold, this is thy theology, O holy father, wherein thou didst emulate the great teachers of the Church, honoring the iconographic images to the glory of their prototypes.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Ineffably wast Thou born of the Virgin, O Christ, and Thou hast enlightened those who are in darkness who cry out: Glory to Thee, O Lord!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon for the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Reading from the First General

Epistle of John \(4:7-11\).

Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one who loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He who loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent His only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

*Stichos:* A good man is he that is compassionate and lendeth.

Gospel according to St. Luke §26 \(6:31-36\).

The Lord said: “As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. For if ye love those who love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those who love them. And if ye do good to those who do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to those of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: for He is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

