Also on The 25th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of the Holy & Righteous Tabitha

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV —

Today the Church of Christ doth glorify a strange wonder: one of the daughters of Adam is received by the grave, as earth returning to the earth, fulfilling the command of the Creator; yet as the Destroyer of death, He giveth utterance through his apostle, saying: “O Tabitha, I say unto thee, arise! And thou shalt live again, that for thy sake all may understand that I am the Resurrection and the Life, and everyone who believeth in Me shall not die forever!” *Twice*

When word of thy resurrection spread throughout the parts of Joppa, belief in Christ was established among many; for all understood the dominion of the Lord Who hath the power to raise up the dead. For this is a fulfillment of prophetic images, in that death hath been slain by the victory of the Son of God, and He is the Master and Bestower of life, Who restoreth and enlighteneth our souls. *Twice*

He Who is the salvation of all men sent His disciples throughout the whole world, that they might preach His resurrection; and if the Lord had not arisen, hope in life eternal would be in vain. He who was preëminent among the apostles arrived in Joppa and commanded Tabitha to rise up from the dead, that all the faithful might truly understand that she received life through the resurrection of Christ. And, believing in miracles and the resurrection without doubt, we fall down in supplication before the Almighty, crying: O Thou Who art full of mercy and kindness, through the prayers of Thy holy one save Thou our souls! *Twice*

Glory…, in the same tone —

O Tabitha who wast called “the doe”, thou wast truly like unto one when thou didst zealously strive to avoid all impiety, didst love thy neighbor and didst abundantly adorn thyself with loving-kindness. Wherefore this queen of the virtues led thee up to the celestial life, and Christ, the King of glory, seeing thee to be a wise virgin holding a splendid lamp in thy right hand, raised thee up again to this transitory life, that, showing forth a manner of life in the flesh worthy of our calling, we may be instructed by thee to walk in the light, may become truly perfect, and may be vouchsafed the sweetness of paradise, the Jerusalem on high, through thy supplications to our Savior.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, these stichera, in Tone I —

Blessed is the righteous one who abideth in grace, for he hath been like unto a tree by streams of waters, whose leaf shall not fall. In thee, O Tabitha, do we see these words of David fulfilled, for thou didst establish thy salvation upon the firm rock which is the trampling down of falls into sin, didst set thy feet upon the path of the virtues, and didst hasten to the mansions of heaven, where thou sittest in never-waning glory. Thither do thou bear supplication unto the throne of the triune Immortal One, that He loose the bonds of sin wherewith we have caused His image to become corrupt, and that, dwelling within us, He establish us also in piety.

The saying of the all-wise one, that a good woman shall have glory and honor, hath been fulfilled: word of thee, O Tabitha, hath gone forth into all the earth; for all have thee as a model of piety fit for emulation, that the greatest of the commandments might be fulfilled. Thy love extended to all men, in accordance with the commandment of God; wherefore, the Lord also loved thee and raised thee up from the grave. Forget us not who celebrate thy memory, and entreat Christ our God, the Master of all, Who is perfect Love, that His peace may reign within us and all throughout the world, and that we may ever abide in His love.

*In Tone II:* “We have no other consolation such as Tabitha hath shown us,” the widows cried aloud to the holy Apostle Peter, “for she devoted her hands to serving us, sheltered many from burning heat and the cold, and brought many of the indigent into her own house, giving the sick all that was necessary for their cure; wherefore, do thou, the preëminent herald of the Almighty, command her to rise from the dead, for our joy and unto the glory of God!”

Glory, in Tone V —

Today widows sing glory unto God with voices of praise, and with them all mortals rejoice; for they have received from the dead an exalted woman of virtue, who hath been and continueth to be for them a refuge amid sorrows and needs; and they rejoice at the all-glorious wonder, for dry bones and human flesh shall arise on the day of judgment, to receive the glory or condemnation of the Bestower of all rewards. Wherefore, let us hasten to join those at His right hand, and let us emulate not sacrifice, but mercy, setting the righteous Tabitha as intercessor before the Lord, for the salvation of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone VIII —

O Mistress and Mother of the Deliverer of the human race, we fall down before thee, and unto thee do we pray: Intercede, O all-pure one, before thy Son, the God of all, that He raise up His people, who have been slain by sins, unto life and spiritual fruitfulness, as of old He raised up Tabitha at the command of the apostle, that in thanksgiving we may cry unto Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

On the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II —

The Son and Word of the unoriginate Father, Who appeared on earth to restore those who had fallen, setteth forth the way to salvation, saying: “Let him who wisheth to be saved be charitable!” And desiring exalted mercy, O Tabitha, thou didst feed the hungry with bread, didst assuage the thirst of those in need, becamest the consolation of widows and orphans, and wast the refuge of the sick and homeless. Wherefore, teach us all to emulate thee, and pray thou that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

When our first father thought himself higher than God, death was shown to be the wages of sin. But committing thy heart unto the Creator, O Tabitha, thou didst love those who were created in the image of the Creator. Wherefore thou didst fulfill the commandment of the New Adam Who hath annulled the curse of our first parent, and didst receive a taste of death; yet thou didst arise from the dead through the power of the Immortal One, that the glory of God might be made manifest unto the faithful, and that all people might see that even in this life the Lord crowneth the righteous and glorifieth those who please Him.

*Stichos:* The Lord brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of clay.

The joy of the widows turned into lamentation at the time of thy repose, O Tabitha, for no one who came to thee departed empty away, but in the name of the Lord thou didst satisfy every human need, didst dry up the tears of the sorrowful with thy heartfelt discourse, didst add thereto the work of thine own hands, and thereby, as with wings, didst soar aloft to the throne of the Lord of the hosts on high. Him do thou entreat, that we be saved.

Glory…, in the same tone —

“Even though ye see Tabitha in the grave, lament not, neither weep,” the son of Jonah said with boldness; “In sending us forth to proclaim His glad tidings, our divine Teacher gave us authority over all flesh: to heal the sick and infirm, to drive out demons and cleanse lepers, and also to resurrect the dead, that the confession of Him Who rose from the dead might be confirmed. For with God all things are possible for the faithful. Wherefore, seeing your faith, I cry aloud, exclaiming: Tabitha, arise from the dead!”

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O new wonder greater than all the wonders of the past! For who hath ever known a mother to give birth without having known a man, and to bear on her arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? Yet it was the will of God to be born. O all-pure one, who bore Him in thine arms as an infant and hast maternal boldness before Him: cease not to pray in behalf of those who honor thee, that He have compassion and save our souls.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Today the Faith of Christ is confirmed by Peter, and the faithful who behold the great wonder which hath been wrought in Joppa join chorus in gladness and glorify with psalms the Son of God, the Bestower of life. The preëminent apostle speaketh, and she who had died riseth from the grave. Her doth He Who hath cast down death give to the Church, that the people may adorn themselves in emulation of her virtues. Wherefore come, ye Christians, let us bear our supplications to the saint: O blessed and loving Tabitha, bear thou our sighs unto the all-holy Trinity, and pray thou with boldness, that we may be children of the preëternal Light, may be counted worthy of the mercy of God, and may abide in love divine; and that peace may reign throughout all the world.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, these sessional hymns, in Tone III —

One of the Trinity, He Who became incarnate for our sake, at the word of His first-enthroned apostle raiseth up from the grave her who died in the flesh, that His confession might reign in the hearts of men through the triumph of virtue. And falling down before Him, we cry aloud: Save us, O Almighty, through the intercession of Tabitha!

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

In the name of the Savior the preëminent apostle raised up Tabitha, who lay in the grave; for he is truly a righteous and pious man, and, instructed by him, we cry aloud: Wondrous is God in His saints!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O unwedded Virgin who supernaturally gavest birth to the Word of God by Whom all life and the universe are established! O our joy and hope, accept thou the entreaties of the blessed Tabitha, and thereby save us who cry unto thee: Rejoice, O Bride unwedded!

After the second chanting of the psalter, these sessional hymns, in Tone VII —

The human race rejoiceth today, and the whole world danceth for joy; for there is no more fear of corruption among mortals. The risen Christ bestoweth life and raiseth up Tabitha from the grave; and, beholding this great wonder, we cry aloud: Raise us up also, O Thou Who lovest mankind, and vouchsafe unto us Thy glory! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Rejoice, O tabernacle of God! Rejoice, O holy of holies, wherein the Effulgence of the glory of the Father, Who of His own will assumed the form of a servant, doth rest, as upon the cherubim! Rejoice, thou who gavest birth unto Him Who giveth life unto all, and Who hath now by His own power, at the word of His disciple, raised up Tabitha from the grave.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We bless thee, O holy and righteous Tabitha, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VII —

Even though, having ascended to heaven, the Destroyer of death and hell reigneth at the right hand of the Father, yet doth He abide inseparably within His Church, as the apostle promised; and He now raiseth up Tabitha from the dead, in full health, at the word of His disciple, teaching the virtues to those who believe on Him. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Lord, we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy pasture. Like a shepherd return us who have strayed, and gather us together who have been scattered by corruption. Have mercy upon Thy flock, take pity upon Thy people, through the supplications of the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone art sinless.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Mark, §21

\[Mk. 5: 24-34\]

At that time, many people followed Jesus, and thronged Him. And a certain woman, who had an issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, when she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched His garment. For she said, If I may touch but His clothes, I shall be whole. And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. And Jesus, immediately knowing in Himself that virtue had gone out of Him, turned Him about in the press, and said: “Who touched My clothes?” And His disciples said unto Him: “Thou seest the multitude thronging Thee, and sayest Thou, Who touched Me?” And He looked round about to see her who had done this thing. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before Him, and told Him all the truth. And He said unto her: “Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

When Tabitha reposed, the faithful of Joppa were seized with grief, especially the widows, who wept, for one had departed from among mortals, who was full of many virtues, a true heir to the promise, who had done great almsdeeds. And when the preëminent apostle was found, all the people of the Church said unto him: “Transform thou the grief and tears of all into joy, for thou dost preach the glad tidings of Him Who hath destroyed death!” And Peter stood in their midst and lifted up his voice, and uttered supplication with authority, saying: “Remain thou no longer among the dead, O thou who hast fallen asleep!”

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “We all hymn thy memory and arising, O Tabitha”, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* There is none like unto Thee, O all-glorious Lord; for with Thy mighty hand Thou didst deliver the people whom Thou hadst acquired, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Today the luminous feast hath arrived, filling the whole world with joy. Tabitha returneth to this life from the sleep of death, showing forth the path to salvation.

Even though, having ascended into heaven, the Destroyer of death and hell reigneth at the right hand of the father, yet doth He also abide inseparably within His Church, according to His true promise; and He now raiseth up His disciple, who was adorned with the virtues, in full health, from the midst of the dead, at the word of His apostle, showing forth to His faithful the path to salvation.

As a Wellspring of mercy, He Who hath promised to have mercy upon the kindly of heart raised up from corruption the blessed Tabitha, who loved her neighbor, unto the edification of all, showing forth through her life the path to salvation.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Virgin who hath brought into the world joy, peace and salvation, with the merciful Tabitha entreat thy Son, the Almighty, that He have mercy upon His people; for He is the way to salvation for His faithful.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Willingly didst Thou descend from on high to earth, O Thou Who art more highly exalted than every principality, and from the uttermost depths of hades thou didst raise up lowly human nature; for there is none more holy than Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

The Author of all creation, abasing Himself for our sake, condescended even to endure the Cross and burial; yet He arose as God in glory, raising up those in the graves. And now He hath also raised up Tabitha from the dead, at the word of the preëminent apostle. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified!

Fulfilling His whole dispensation concerning us, the Master of life and death sent forth His apostles, the initiates of the mysteries of heaven, to all the nations, to proclaim the salvation of all mortals; and at the utterance of the rock of faith He raiseth up Tabitha who had died. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified!

He Who imparteth life unto all raiseth up from corruption the merciful Tabitha who had tasted of death; and He confirmeth the faith of His disciples by the miracle of His evangelist. Therein hath He gloriously been glorified.

*Theotokion:* In thanksgiving let us all gloriously glorify her who is more exalted than the heavens and more pure than all creation, who revealed to the world Emmanuel Who hath saved us and made us His own, Who hath united us to Him and raised us up from everlasting death.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III —

O wonder transcending nature! O the greatness of God! Through the resurrection of the Creator life hath been established and death cast down! And in His apostles He worketh all manner of miracles, as we now see in the raising of Tabitha from the dead at the word of Peter.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

In the fervor of faith I cry out to thee with unworthy lips and a heart defiled, O Theotokos: Save me who am drowning in sins! Take pity on one who is slain by despair, that, saved, I may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou help of Christians!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* This is our God, Who became incarnate of the Virgin and hath deified our nature! And, hymning Him, we cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

A sign of the universal resurrection on the last day do we now see in Joppa: the apostle commandeth, and a dead woman obtaineth life again, edifying all in virtue. And falling down before her, we cry aloud: O blessed Tabitha, pray thou that we all be saved!

By the power of the resurrected Savior at the sound of Peter’s voice thou wast roused from the sleep of death, that thou mightest again dwell in righteousness according to the commandments of the merciful Savior. Him do thou beseech, O blessed Tabitha, that we all be saved.

The mystery of death merely touched thee, O blessed Tabitha, for the Savior, through the voice of His disciple, commanded thee to rise from the dead, that all mortals might know that the goings out and the comings in of our life are in the right hand of God. Him do thou entreat, that we all be saved.

*Theotokion:* The Archangel Gabriel made announcement to thee, O Virgin, crying out that thy Son had cast down death and arisen as God, bestowing deliverance upon His people, who fervently cry out to thee : O Mistress, our hope, pray thou that we all be saved!

Ode V

*Irmos:* “Now I shall arise, now I shall be glorified, now I shall be exalted, elevating fallen human nature, which I received from the Virgin, to the noetic light of My divinity!” said God through the prophet.

No one setteth a lighted lamp under a bushel, but rather placeth it upon a lamp-stand, that it might shed light upon all. Wherefore, at the word of the preëminent apostle, the Lord Who loveth mankind raiseth thee up now, O blessed Tabitha, full of the oil of mercy and shining with the light of Christ. Entreat thou the Savior, the Bestower of life, that He enlighten our souls.

He Who hath the authority to judge the living and the dead sendeth His disciples to resurrect the dead, unto the confirmation of the glad tidings of the Gospel. Wherefore, Tabitha also is roused from the sleep of death, and we fall down before her, crying aloud: Entreat Him Who arose for our sake, that He enlighten our souls.

With fitting hymnody let us all praise her whom the first-enthroned among the apostles raised from the grave. O blessed Tabitha, thou chosen vessel of the mercy of God, beseech the Kind-hearted One Who loveth mankind, that He illumine our souls.

*Theotokion:* Thee do we magnify, O Virgin Theotokos! Thou art a noetic lamp revealing to the world the unapproachable Light, whereby we all are illumined in the font of baptism, even though we have been benighted by transgressions. Beseech Him Who received flesh of thee, that He illumine our souls.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

All creation is now filled with awe and joy, beholding death laid low in the resurrection of Tabitha by a man who received the command of the God-man, the Destroyer of hell and death. To Him do we cry aloud: Grant us Thy peace, O Almighty One!

O blessed Tabitha who arose from the dead at the sound of the voice of the apostle whom the Lord had sent to perform miracles for the increase of men’s faith: Cry aloud unto Him before Whom thou standest and upon Whom thou dost gaze continually in thy second repose: Grant Thou Thy peace unto Thy people, O Almighty One!

When the voice of the apostle entered thine ear, O blessed one, thou didst rise up from thy death-bier, and, having lived piously, didst again pass over to heavenly glory, where do thou beseech the Lord of all, O Tabitha, that He grant peace to us all, in that He is almighty.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, our joy and refuge of salvation! We are tempest-tossed by transgressions and the perils of life, and we fall down before thee, offering thee contrite hearts, and call upon thee for help: Grant peace to the world through thy supplications!

Kontakion, in Tone IV —

The people of Joppa were filled with awe, and the angels of God marvelled, when he who healed Æneas called forth from the dead her who was called Dorcas, who was wholly adorned with loving-kindness, for whom the poor widows cried aloud. And now, O blessed Tabitha, hearken to our prayers which are offered unto thee, and beg thou the Bestower of all good things that He grant mercy and compassions unto His faithful, that, blessing thee, we may cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou who teachest us the virtues!

*Ikos:* Thou art the refuge of the orphans and widows, O Tabitha, handmaid of the Lord. Thou didst do good unto the people, didst fulfill the commandments of the Gospel, and didst teach men not to live for themselves, but to do good unto their neighbors. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be an heir to the kingdom of heaven, and didst abide on the earth, possessed of heavenly love. Therein by thy supplications do thou cause us to share, who honor thee with faith and cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou who teachest us the virtues!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O unoriginate Word, only-begotten Son, Who existed in the beginning with the Father and the Spirit: blessed and supremely exalted art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The choir of the apostles scattered throughout the world, illumining all the ends of the earth with the light of the Gospel. And by raising up Tabitha from the dead Peter confirmed the whole world to confess the resurrection of Christ, the Bestower of life, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

The dead shall be resurrected and those in the graves shall arise, the prophet said of old, foreseeing in the Spirit the trampling down of hades. And this was revealed also by thy falling asleep and arising, O Tabitha. Wherefore, faithfully honoring thy memory, we exalt Christ, the Bestower of life, forever.

Confessing the Lord Jesus with thy mouth, O blessed Tabitha, thou didst give thy heart to Him, didst hasten to carry out His commandments, and didst minister to the poor with the work of thy hands. And by virtue, as with a ladder, thou didst ascend to the mansions of heaven. And we, beholding thee shining with the light of the Gospel, hymn and supremely exalt Christ, the Bestower of life, forever.

*Theotokion:* When Thomas arrived at thy tomb, O Mistress, and beheld only thy cincture, he understood that thou hadst arisen from the tomb through the grace and power of thy Son. Then the apostles glorified the Lord and thee, our helper. And taught by them we also believe that thou art ever inseparably with us. Vouchsafe unto us sinners, bereft of the oil of mercy, that we may stand with the choirs of the elect before the throne of Christ, the Bestower of life, like Tabitha, that we may exalt Him supremely forever.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Thou hast been shown to be a dwelling-place of the most Holy Spirit, O right wondrous one; for thou didst uproot from thy heart all sinful thoughts, didst acquire the fear of God beyond all things, and didst erect within thy soul a temple of piety, divine knowledge and love for man. And now, rejoicing in the mansions of heaven, pray for us who honor thee with faith.

The spiritual fruit of peace and joy in the Holy Spirit is love, which is the bond of perfection, long-suffering, goodness and loving-kindness. And possessed of all these things, thou didst make within thyself an abode of the grace of God, O right laudable Tabitha, and wast a model of virtue, proclaiming the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven by thy manner of life. Wherefore, pray for us who honor thee with faith.

Thou didst show forth an example of consolation and long-suffering, O blessed Tabitha, by thy life in the Lord; for thou didst mingle all thy works with the mercy which poured forth from thy heart, wherein grace abode. Wherefore, grant us also this oil, that our lamps may not be extinguished, for we honor thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* The mystery which existed from before time began was made plain, O Virgin, when, in fulfillment of the counsel of the Preëternal One, Gabriel announced to thee the birth of Emmanuel, the true God and man, Who hath resurrected and deified all with Himself. Him do thou beseech, O our all-blessed helper, that He grant eternal joy to those who honor thee with faith.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* The ineffable hidden mystery of God is revealed in thee, O all-pure Virgin; for God hath become incarnate of thee in His loving-kindness. Wherefore, we magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Following the word of the Lord, thou didst love mercy, O blessed Tabitha, and didst offer Him thy heart as a pure sacrifice, which thou didst cleanse with the fire of divine love; and gazing upon the people, thou didst perceive in them the image of God, and didst deal with them as the Savior of the world commanded. Wherefore, grant thy love also unto us, and entreat Him Whom thou didst love, that He grant us life without end.

The ends of the earth are glad, and Joppa rejoiceth, beholding an all-glorious miracle now wrought: for a blessed and righteous woman hath arisen from the grave, a disciple of Him Who trampled down the power of death and the gates of hell. Him do thou entreat, O Tabitha, in behalf of us all.

Glorification and hymnody do we offer, O blessed Tabitha, unto the only Wellspring of immortality, Who at the word of His apostle raised thee from the dead, confirmed the Faith, and hath taught us how to enter into His heavenly mansions by the path of mercy which thou didst tread. And filled with joy by this, we offer him ardent hymns and prayers: By Thy light illumine us all!

*Theotokion:* Those in heaven and those on earth hymn thee with voices of praise, O Mother of God, for through thee have we come to know God and have found life eternal. For thy divine Son hath broken asunder the bonds of death through His own death and resurrection. Wherefore, honoring the raising of Tabitha from the sleep of death by the voice of the preëminent apostle, we beseech thee, O Mistress: Grant peace to the Church and to thy world, O Theotokos; ease the trials of the Church, and set us among the choirs of thy chosen ones.

Exapostilarion —

The light which hath shone forth from the tomb of the preëternal and incarnate Word hath illumined the whole world with the effulgence of the resurrection, whereby death hath been trampled down. And the apostle, bearing the effulgence of this life-bearing light, called forth Tabitha from the dead, in Joppa, confirming the confession of Him Who arose, to Whom we cry aloud: Enlighten us by Thy truth!

Glory…, another exapostilarion —

O thrice-radiant Trinity, with the beams of Thy light illumine us who are benighted by transgressions, and raise us up who have been cast down and lie prostrate on the ground, that we may not die forever, but may arise from the corruption of sin, like Tabitha from the grave. For even though we all sin, yet do we confess without hesitation the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, in Orthodox manner.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure and all-blessed Virgin, Mother of the Effulgence of the glory of the unoriginate Father, thou who received the light of the Sun of righteousness: Like the all-luminous moon enlighten thy people, that all darkness may be driven from their hearts, for they all have thee as their helper, protection and refuge.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII —

Blessed art thou, O holy Tabitha, who ripened within the vineyard of Christ, which is the Church of God. From Jesus most sweet, the Vine of truth, thou didst draw forth divine streams of grace, whereby thou didst produce fruit on earth for heaven. Like grapes of the vine do thou nurture and gladden us, that we may emulate thee in good works and be vouchsafed ineffable good things.

The Lord once taught that if a grain of wheat, falling to the ground, doth not die, it remaineth as it is; but if it dieth, it putteth forth fruit in abundance. Thy falling asleep, O Tabitha, hath been shown to be fruitful, for thou didst arise from the dead for the sake of the widows’ tears, not only because of thy virtues, of which the whole Church hath now heard ; and thou hast been shown to be a right goodly model for the emulation of many. Moreover, this was wrought for the confirmation of the Faith of Christ, which openeth to men the gates of paradise, that those in heaven may be united with those on earth. And, though lacking in the virtues, we ask thy prayers to the most Compassionate One, that He save and have mercy upon our souls, and grant unto the world peace and great mercy.

Today the assemblies of the faithful join choirs, glorifying the magnitude of virtue which the Lord revealed in the life of His disciple, who flourished like a palm-tree, increasing the talants of the Lord.

O Tabitha, entreat remission of transgressions for those who call thee blessed.

Glory…, in the same tone —

Hearkening to the voice of Christ the Master, Who said: “Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect”, thou didst follow His divine words, O Tabitha, didst plant the seeds of everlasting life in thy heart as in goodly soil, and didst show forth fruits before men, who glorify Him Who hath glorified thee, and who learn to live according to thine example. Pray thou for all who keep thy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

The Acts of the Apostles, §23 \[Acts 9: 32-42\]

In those days, as Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda. And there he found a certain man named Æneas, who had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy. And Peter said unto him: “Æneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed.” And he arose immediately. And all that dwelt at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the Lord. Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did. And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber. And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them. Then Peter arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them. But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said: “Tabitha, arise!” And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up. And he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive. And it was known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me.

*Stichos:* And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of clay.

Gospel according to Matthew, §104

\[Mt. 25: 1-13\]

The Lord said this parable: “The Kingdom of heaven is like unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. Those who were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made: “Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him!” Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: “Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.” But the wise answered, saying: “Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.” And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they who were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying: “Lord, Lord, open to us!” But he answered and said: “Verily I say unto you, I know you not.” Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

