The 25th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs Marcian & Martyrius, The Notaries

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the holy and righteous Tabitha\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Having finished the race and kept the Faith, ye were crowned with the wreath of martyrdom, O Marcian and Martyrius, ye immovable pillars of the Church, breasts putting forth the milk of truth, lustrous pearls, beacons illumining creation with the splendors of piety.

Having between yourselves a single understanding and agreeing as one, O godly twain, ye destroyed the division of Arius, teaching all to worship the Son as consubstantial with the Father and equally without beginning with the Spirit: the Trinity in Unity, the Unity in Trinity, the one Godhead indivisible in three Persons.

Ye showed yourselves to be like-minded followers, emulators and zealots of the sacred preacher Paul, and with the outpouring of your blood ye drowned the enemy, dried up the torrent of grievous heresies and showed yourselves to be rivers of piety, watering the Church of Christ, O Marcian and Martyrius.

Glory…, the composition of Germanus, in Tone I —

As disciples and followers of the preacher and confessor of the consubstantial Trinity, O blessed ones, persecuted with him therefor, ye preferred death by the sword to blasphemous heresy. Wherefore, adorned by God with crowns of martyrdom, and having attained boldness before Him, pray ye, that those who honor your memory may be delivered from misfortunes.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…” —

When she beheld the Lamb upon the Cross bereft of form and beauty, the most immaculate Ewe-lamb and Mistress said, weeping: “Woe is me! Where hath Thy comeliness gone, O Thou Who art most sweet? Where is the shining grace of Thine image, O my Son most beloved?”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and, Glory…, in Tone III —

Having fended off heresies with the shield of the Faith, Marcian and Martyrius, the champions of the Trinity and noetic beacons of the Church, illumined the world with the light of Orthodoxy. And, obedient to Paul the equal of the apostles, the pastor and teacher of true dogmas, they set at nought the distinctions of Arius and Nestorius and did away with the confusions of Sabellius and Severus. And theologizing concerning the Unity in Trinity, and God Who was incarnate of the Virgin, the most lauded ones preached that all should piously hymn the one Christ in two natures. Wherefore, having received crowns of victory from heaven, the divinely eloquent ones ask for us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion —

A sword pierced thy heart, O all-pure one, when thou didst behold thy Son upon the Cross, and thou didst cry out: “Show me not to be childless, O my Son and my God, Who hast preserved me in virginity even after giving birth!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos; and the canon of the martyrs, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer hymnody unto the two martyrs”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Ever most greatly illumined with the light of the Holy Trinity, O holy ones, ye are become constant luminaries; wherefore, celebrating today your radiant feast with faith, we rejoice in splendor.

Desiring to behold on earth the Word Who shone forth for our sake from the Virgin, O athletes, and confessing Him to be consubstantial, with most mighty resolve ye suffered a violent death.

Showing yourselves to be followers and disciples of the wise Paul, O divinely eloquent ones, ye preached the Son as equal in honor with the Father; wherefore, hewn down with the sword, ye have sanctified the earth with the outpouring of your blood, O athletes.

*Theotokion:* Conceiving the beginningless Son of God, O pure one, thou gavest flesh to Him, and He became man in His ineffable mercy; wherefore, worshipping Him, we piously glorify thee, the cause of the deification of all.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Illumined by the Spirit with the divine truths of Orthodoxy, ye dispelled the darkness of Arius, becoming witnesses of the Almighty.

Preaching the dogma of the equality of the Word with the Father, O holy Marcian and Martyrius, ye preferred to die, and have passed over to life without end.

Through sacred enlistment ye have been enrolled with the angels and have all-radiantly joined the choirs of the martyrs; wherefore, we praise your honored memory.

*Theotokion:* Arrayed in golden robes like a queen, O Mistress, thou standest now before God the King, praying for thy servants.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Continuing your confessions even unto the shedding of your blood, O glorious martyrs, ye accepted the divine definition concerning God, denouncing the falsehood of the heretics and preserving the Orthodox Faith. Pray ye unceasingly to Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, God took on flesh in thy womb; and though becoming man, the one Lord remained God, preserving thee, the Virgin Mother, as immaculate after giving birth, as thou wast before birthgiving. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished Ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprung forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The martyrs of the Lord, made steadfast by their valiant resolve and the perfect wisdom of Orthodoxy, finished the contest of martyrdom and have driven away the darkness of heresy.

He who did not profess that the Word is consubstantial with the Father and was mindlessly wroth against you, O martyrs, was strangled with the cords of your sacred struggles and by the grace of God was drowned in the torrents of your blood.

With joyous hymnody let the valiant Marcian and Martyrius be praised: the breasts of the Church exuding the milk of Orthodoxy and nurturing the pious.

*Theotokion:* Of old, the sacred prophet called thee the divine mountain of God greatly overshadowed by the virtues, O all-pure Virgin, from whom the Savior and Word appeared for the restoration and enlightenment of our souls.

Ode V

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Ye showed yourselves to be followers of the all-wise dogmas of Paul, the divine hierarch, O martyrs; and emulating his ways, ye suffered patiently and have been lawfully crowned.

Like stars ye shine forth radiantly at the summit of the honored Church, driving away the most profound darkness of the heresy of Arius, O most valiant martyrs.

Withdrawing from the beauties of life, O holy ones, ye drew nigh unto Christ, and by shedding but a little blood ye have inherited an immovable kingdom, O glorious athletes.

*Theotokion:* On earth thou gavest birth to the Son and Truth Who is consubstantial with the Father and the divine Spirit, O Theotokos. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He have compassion on our souls.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Following the words of Paul, the all-wise pastor, ye kept the Orthodox Faith, and like lambs ye were slaughtered by the swords of the blood-thirsty, rejoicing.

Precious in the sight of the Lord was your death, O right glorious and wise warriors; wherefore, every year ye are blessed by all with honors, O saints.

O most blessed and valiant athletes Marcian and Martyrius, the Church of Christ ever rejoiceth, possessing you as a wellspring of miracles.

*Theotokion:* With mouth and tongue we truly confess thee to be the Mother of our God, O Virgin. Him do thou earnestly entreat, O pure one, that our souls be saved.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

Having struggled well from childhood, O Marcian and wise Martyrius, ye cast down the apostate Arius, preserving the Orthodox Faith unadulterated, following Paul, the wise teacher. Wherefore, with him ye have found life, as most excellent champions of the Trinity.

*Ikos:* As servants of the piety of God Who loveth mankind, O blessed twain, go ye quickly before me and deliver me from evils, bestowing upon me discourse of wisdom, that I may praise your suffering for the Faith, O holy ones who suffered with steadfast integrity and have received heavenly crowns. And ye rejoice with the choirs of athletes and apostles, teachers and honored hierarchs, as preachers of the Word of God and most excellent champions of the Trinity.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Following well the sacred pastor, and adorned with Orthodoxy, to no avail were ye slain at the hands of the heretics, O all-glorious warriors.

Faithfully preserving the law of God unadulterated, O divine martyrs, ye suffered lawfully and were slain together at the hands of the iniquitous.

After your sacred burial, O saints, ye bury the infirmities of those who approach your tomb with faith, through your holy mediation before the Bestower of life.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from eternal damnation by thy birthgiving, O Mother of God, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O ever blessed and joyous one!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Professing the Lamb of God to be consubstantial with the Father, ye were slaughtered like two lambs; and brought to the banquet on high, ye have been reckoned among the assembly of those who suffered.

Strengthened by the power of the Spirit, ye uprooted the savagery of falsehood, O wise martyrs, and, having suffered mightily, ye heal those who are grievously afflicted by infirmities.

As physicians of the passions of our souls, O holy martyrs, by your divine supplications free us from cruel infirmities and the uprisings of the adversary.

*Triadicon:* We hymn the unbegotten Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one uncreated Essence, the one Divinity; and we cry out together: All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos and Mistress, who gavest birth to the Life of all, thou glory of the martyrs and the righteous, and fervent cleansing of transgressions: Thou hast brought life to us who are dead.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Enlivened by divine strength, O athletes, ye were not afraid of death, and, zealously bowing your necks beneath the sword, ye valiantly finished your divine contest. Wherefore, ye are worthily called blessed.

Like two radiant beacons ye illumine the fullness of the world with the splendors of divine sufferings, O wise Marcian and Martyrius, driving away the gloom of the dark heresy of Arius.

Having vanquished Macedonius who is blind of mind, ye received from God crowns of glory as is meet. Standing before the throne of the Master, O right glorious ones, ask for us perfect remission of transgressions.

Your divine memorial hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, illumining the hearts of all who celebrate it, O blessed ones. Thereon beseech ye the Lord, that He deliver us from the darkness of our offenses.

*Theotokion:* As the dwelling-place of the Light, O pure and most immaculate one, illumine the eyes of my soul which have been darkened by indifference and are ever afflicted with the most profound gloom of ignorance, that I may bless thee with faith.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…” —

As followers of the most blessed Paul, ye finished your course and with him have received the kingdom of Christ and immortal glory; and ye stand together with all the saints before the worshipful Trinity, glorifying the Godhead as is meet.

Theotokion —

The ranks of the incorporeal ones praise thy birthgiving; for thou alone hast filled those on earth with joy. Wherefore, we the faithful glorify thee who art all-immaculate, praising thee with hymns. For upon those in darkness thou hast shone forth the Light Which shineth forth today like the dawn.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §224, from the midpoint \[Eph 4:7-13\]

Brethren: Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore He saith: “When He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.” \(Now that He ascended, what is it but that He also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He Who descended is the same also Who ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill all things.\) And He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Matthew, §34b \[Mt 10:1, 5-8\]

At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying: “Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

Communion Verse —

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

