The 26th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy And Glorious Greatmartyr Demetrius The Myrrh-Gusher Of Thessalonica

Commemoration Of The Great And Dreadful Earthquake At Constantinople In 740 A.D.

If the pastor or abbot so desireth, he holdeth vigil.

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...” —

O God, Who shakest the foundations of the whole earth, Who alone dost cause the seabed tremble as the Creator of all: Deliver us from the earthquake of Thy righteous wrath, O Thou Who lovest mankind, being ever entreated in Thy loving-kindness. *Twice*

Thessalonica joineth chorus on the day of thy commemoration, O thrice-blessed Demetrius, and calleth upon all the surrounding cities to keep thy splendid festival. And, assembling with them, we praise thy struggles in song.

Come, ye faithful, and, assembling, let us praise the warrior of Christ, the valiant luminary Demetrius, who trampled down all the might of the enemy, and with faith let us cry out to him: Entreat Christ in our behalf, O martyr!

Glory..., in Tone VI —

Today is the whole universe illumined with the passion-bearer’s rays; and the Church of God, adorned with flowers, crieth out to thee, O Demetrius: O favorite of Christ and most fervent intercessor, cease thou never to pray for thy servants!

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We entreat thee, O Mistress: Pray thou with the holy apostles, that He have mercy on our souls.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “O House of Ephratha...” —

Thee have we as a bestower of many gifts, O favorite of Christ, for thou dost ever fulfill the requests which we have.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

O blessed Demetrius, accept these offerings, sweet hymns, praises of thy sufferings, and thanks for thy graces.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the Lord they shall blossom forth.

O beauty of athletes, splendor of martyrs, protector of kings: Accept now the praise of those who glorify thee with love.

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O thing of comeliness divine! A Virgin, who remained so after giving birth! God the Word, Who hath been born, taketh human nature upon Himself and revealeth material things!

Troparion of the greatmartyr, in Tone III —

The whole world hath found thee to be a great champion amid misfortunes, who conquered the pagans, O passion-bearer. Therefore, as thou didst cast down the pride of Lyæus and didst appoint the bold Nestor for the struggle, thus, O Demetrius, beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy.

Glory..., Now & ever…: Troparion of the earthquake, in Tone VIII —

O Christ our God, Who lookest on the earth and makest it tremble: Deliver us from the dreadful threat of earthquake, and send down upon us thy rich mercies and save us, through the supplications of the Theotokos.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera: 4 in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “When from the Tree...” —

O glorious martyr Demetrius, like a radiant star dost thou ever illumine thy native land; for thou dost ever protect it from the destruction wrought by the foe, and dost deliver it from misery and every tempest. Wherefore, O blessed one, it doth joyously offer praise unto thee, celebrating thine annual commemoration, hymning with faith and love the Lord Who hath glorified thee. *Twice*

O martyr and passion-bearer of Christ, holy Demetrius, thou dost illumine the world with miracles like the sun. Wherefore, on the day of thy commemoration we all delight in thy wonders, O blessed one, keeping festival with faith. Thus, as thou hast boldness before the Lord, beseech Him to save thy servants from corruption and tribulations.

Thy side was pierced by spears for the sake of the Savior Whose side was pierced on the Cross; for with love didst thou emulate Him in thy wounds, O passion-bearer Demetrius, revealing unto all the steadfastness of thy witness. Wherefore, the tyrant fell wounded, receiving the shaft of thy confession, O athlete of Christ.

And 4 in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O all-glorious wonder...” —

O most glorious wonder! Today, on the commemoration of the martyr Demetrius, joy hath shone forth in heaven and on earth. He is crowned with praises by the angels and receiveth hymns from men. O, how he suffered! How well he fought the fight! Thereby was the evil foe brought low when Christ vanquished him. *Twice*

O most glorious wonder! With rays of miracles brighter than the sun doth Demetrius ever enlighten the ends of the earth, he that is illumined with the never-fading light and delighteth in the Light unwaning. By his rays have clouds of barbarians been dispelled, infirmities driven away, and the demons vanquished.

O most glorious wonder! The thrice-blessed Demetrius, pierced for the sake of Christ, hath ever shown himself to the foe as a two-edged sword, hewing down the uprisings of the enemy and casting down the audacity of the demons. Let us cry out to him: O holy Demetrius, save us that ever faithfully honor thee with love!

Glory…: The composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI —

Today the universal festival of the passion-bearer doth call us together. Come, then, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us radiantly celebrate his commemoration, saying: Rejoice, thou who didst rend the robe of ungodliness with faith and didst clothe thyself in manliness of spirit! Rejoice, thou who didst wreck the schemes of the alien one with the might given thee by the One God! Rejoice, thou who in thy pierced limbs didst spiritually portray the suffering of Christ for us! Him do thou entreat, O Demetrius, adornment of athletes, that we be delivered from enemies, visible and invisible, and that our souls be saved!

Now & ever…: the Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three lessons:

Reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah

Turn from heaven, and look from Thy holy habitation and from Thy glory. Where is Thy zeal and Thy strength? Where is the abundance of Thy mercy and of Thy compassions, that Thou hast withdrawn Thyself from us? For Thou art our Father. Though Abraham knew us not, and Israel did not acknowledge us, yet do Thou, O Lord our Father, deliver us. Thy name hath been upon us from the beginning. Why hast Thou caused us to err, O Lord, from Thy way, and hast hardened our hearts, that we should not fear Thee? Return for Thy servants’ sake, for the sake of the tribes of Thine inheritance, that we may inherit a small part of Thy holy mountain. We are become as at the beginning, when Thou didst not rule over us, and Thy name was not called upon us. If Thou wouldst open the heavens, trembling will take hold upon the mountains from Thee, and they shall melt, as wax melteth before the fire; and fire shall burn up the enemies, and Thy name shall be manifest among the adversaries. At Thy presence the nations shall be troubled, whenever Thou shalt work gloriously; trembling from Thee shall take hold upon the mountains. From of old we have not heard, neither have our eyes seen a God beside Thee, and Thy works which Thou wilt perform for those who wait for mercy. For these blessings shall happen to those who work righteousness, and they shall remember Thy ways. And now, O Lord, Thou art our Father, and we are clay, all of us the work of Thine hands. Be not very wroth with us, and remember not our sins forever; but look now upon us, for we are all Thy people.

Reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah

Thus saith the Lord: “I remember the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thine espousals, in following the Holy One of Israel,” saith the Lord. Israel was the holy people to the Lord, and the first-fruits of His increase. “All who devoured him shall offend; evils shall come upon them,” saith the Lord. Hear the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and every family of the house of Israel. Thus saith the Lord: “What trespass have your fathers found in Me, that they have revolted far from Me, and gone after vanities, and become vain? And they said not, ‘Where is the Lord, Who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, Who guided us in the wilderness, in an untried and trackless land, in a land which no man at all went through, and no man dwelt there?’ And I brought you to Carmel, that ye should eat the fruits thereof, and the good thereof; and ye went in, and defiled My land, and made Mine inheritance an abomination. The priests said not, ‘Where is the Lord?’, and they who held by the law knew Me not. The shepherds also sinned against Me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and went after that which profited not. Therefore, I will yet plead with you, and will plead with your children’s children. For go to the isles of Kittim, and see; and send to Kedar, and observe accurately, and see if such things have been done; if the nations will change their gods, though they are not gods: but My people have changed their glory, for that from which they shall not be profited. The heavens are amazed at this, and are sore stricken with horror,” saith the Lord.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(4:7-15\).

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was loved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera for the greatmartyr —

The composition of George the Sykeiote —

*In Tone I:* Be thou glad in the Lord, O city of Thessalonica! Rejoice and hold chorus, splendidly arraying thyself with faith, for thou hast as a treasure within thy bosom Demetrius, the most glorious passion-bearer and witness to the truth. Delight thou in his miracles, behold the healings he worketh, and gaze upon him who casteth down the audacity of the aliens; and cry out in thanksgiving unto the Savior: O Lord, glory to Thee!

The composition of Anatolius —

With the beauty of hymns let us brighten this day, and let us proclaim the struggles of the martyr; for the great Demetrius moveth us to praise. For, having manfully repelled the assaults of the demons, he zealously entered the stadium; and, having gloriously carried off the trophies of victory, he entreateth the Savior, that our souls be saved.

The composition of Germanus —

*In Tone II:* O wise Demetrius, Christ God hath rightly set thy soul in the dwellings on high; for thou wast a champion of the Trinity and, hard as adamant, thou didst manfully suffer in the arena; and pierced in thine incorrupt sides, O most honored one, emulating Him Who was pierced on the Tree for the salvation of the whole world, thou didst receive the gift of working miracles, richly bestowing healings upon men. Wherefore, today we celebrate thy repose as is meet, glorifying the Lord Who hath glorified thee.

Glory..., in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Let us trumpet forth...” —

Let us make haste with faith and love, let us cry out hymns of jubilation, and let us all clap our hands during this festival of our chief leader. Let the armies of heaven rejoice over him who was pierced for the King and Lord Who was pierced with a spear, and who boldly cast down the audacity of Lyæus. Let the earth and the sea marvel at the most glorious signs wrought by the radiant luminary. Let the young praise, as is fitting, him who teacheth restraint to youth, the support of old age, the intercessor amid misfortunes, the enricher of the destitute, the guide on the good path, the ally in time of war, O city of Thessalonica, and in prayer let us say: O most glorious Demetrius, go thou before us and rescue us from every need, and save thy servants by thy supplications.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, the composition of Patriarch Germanus, in the same tone —

Let us sound the trumpet of hymns, for the Virgin Mother, the Queen of all, bending down from on high, with blessings crowneth those who hymn her. Let kings and princes make haste hither, and let them clap their hands in hymns to the Queen who gave birth unto the King Who, in His love for mankind, was well pleased to loose those who afore were held fast by death. O pastors and teachers, assembling, let us praise the all-pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lampstand, the Light-bearing cloud, who is more spacious than the ­heavens, the animate tabernacle, the fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar that held the Manna, the portal of the Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.

At the aposticha, these stichera of the earthquake, the composition of Symeon of the Wondrous Mountain:

*In Tone II:* When the earth trembled with fear at Thy wrath, the mountains and hills quaked, O Lord; but, regarding us with the eye of Thy compassion, be Thou not wroth with us in Thine anger, but, taking pity on the works of Thy hands, free us from the terrible threat of earthquake, in that Thou art good and lovest mankind.

*Stichos:* He looketh on the earth and maketh it tremble.

*In Tone IV:* Awesome art Thou, O Lord, and who can abide Thy righteous wrath? Who can entreat Thee? Who can render Thee mild toward Thy sinful and despairing people, O Good One? The ranks of heaven: the angels, authorities, principalities, thrones, dominions, cherubim and seraphim, cry out to Thee in our behalf: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Lord! Disdain not the works of Thy hands, and in the compassion of Thy mercy save Thou Thine imperiled city.

*Stichos:* Thou madest the earth to quake and troubled it.

Because of their offenses, the Ninevites heard the threat of destruction by earthquake; yet, through the resurrection of Jonah in the intermediate sign of the whale, made entreaty. Thus, taking pity on Thy people and their babes and cattle, Thou didst accept their cry. So also take pity and have mercy on us who are being chastised, for the sake of Thine own rising on the third day.

Glory…: the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII —

O ever-memorable Demetrius, thy most blessed and immaculate soul hath the heavenly Jerusalem as a dwelling place, whose walls have been adorned by the all-pure hands of the invisible God. And on earth thy most eminent temple doth possess thy most precious and much-suffering body as an inviolate treasury of miracles, a medicine for infirmities; and having recourse thereto we draw forth healings. O all-praised one, from the assaults of the adversary preserve this city which magnifieth thee, for thou hast boldness before Christ, Who hath glorified thee.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of Demetrius, twice, and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice...,” once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the Earthquake, twice; Glory..., that of Demetrius; Now & ever..., that of the earthquake.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...” —

Today we piously celebrate the feast of the passion-bearer Demetrius, for he entreateth Christ unceasingly to grant peace and mercy unto all. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, the fervent help of those amid misfortunes, our helper and deliverance before God, for by her have we been delivered from corruption.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before...” —

Thy memorial hath illuminated the Church of God, O glorious martyr Demetrius, and hath brought all together to praise thee fittingly with hymns as a true warrior and destroyer of the enemy, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, by thy supplication deliver us from temptations. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion —

We hymn thee, O Bride of God, Mother of Christ God, glorifying thine incomprehensible birthgiving, whereby we have been delivered from the deception of the devil and from all misfortunes, O Mistress Theotokos; and we cry out with faith: Have mercy on thy flock, O thou who alone art all-hymned!

The Polyeleos and Magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer Demetrius, and we honor thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and those who hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the ­righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...” —

As with rays of light and the radiance of miracles thou dost illumine and enlighten all the ends of the earth like a most luminous star. And like another paradise thou dost make fragrant and dost gladden souls, and dost cause infirmities to cease. Wherefore, we hymn thee as is meet, O most blessed one, and with love we cherish thy precious memory. O passion-bearer Demetrius, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of mankind, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, hast given birth without seed to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead made His abode within thee, and thou gavest suck unto thy Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God to grant remission of offenses unto those who down before thine all-holy birthgiving with faith.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

Let every breath praise the Lord!

Gospel According to St. Matthew § 36 \(10:16-22\).

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father Who speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end shall be saved.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

Today the universal festival of the passion-bearer doth call us together. Come, then, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us radiantly celebrate his commemoration, saying: Rejoice, thou who didst rend the garment of ungodliness with faith and didst robe thyself in manliness of spirit! Rejoice, thou who didst wreck the schemes of the alien one with the might given thee by the One God! Rejoice, thou who in thy pierced limbs didst spiritually emulate the suffering of Christ for us! Him do thou entreat, O Demetrius, adornment of athletes, that we be delivered from enemies, visible and invisible, and that our souls be saved!

Three canons: one of the Earthquake, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and 2 of the greatmartyr, with four troparia each.

Ode I

Canon for the earthquake, the acrostic whereof is: “O Christ, quickly put an end to the quaking of the earth!” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

As Thy wrath is dreadful, Thou hast delivered us therefrom, O Lord, not having buried in the ground all that we have raised up. Wherefore, we ever glorify Thee with thanksgiving.

O Master, Thou dost shake the whole earth like a dry leaf, making the faithful steadfast in the fear of Thee; and we ever rejoice at our utter correction, O Lord.

Deliver us all from the earthquake which doth weigh down greatly upon us, O Lord, and let not Thine inheritance perish utterly which hath angered Thy long-suffering by many evils.

*Theotokion:* As servants we cry to thee, O Mother of God: Rescue us from the most oppressive quaking of the earth and from corruption, mercifully showing forth thy wonted mercies upon this city and people.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr Demetrius, the acrostic whereof is: “I give utterance concerning the right victorious Demetrius!” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Crowned with a divine wreath of martyrdom, thou makest merry in the presence of God, shining with splendors therefrom and filled with radiance, O right wondrous greatmartyr .

The Master hath received thee who art a witness to the truth, who struggled with endurance even to the shedding of thy blood, and steadfastly showed forth opposition to the tyrants, O blessed one.

The author of evil didst thou lay low, O Demetrius, slaying him with the spear of thy martyrdom, strengthened therefor with divine grace and power which passeth understanding, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* He Who, as God, was before time begotten without mother hath come among us, receiving flesh and uniting Himself thereto through thee without father, O all-hymned Theotokos, which transcendeth comprehension and recounting.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the grace of the myrrh of Demetrius,” the composition of George of Skilitsa, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

O Demetrius, thou freely flowing wellspring of fragrant and precious myrrh, who washest my heart clean of the filth of the passions: Having shown me to be the fragrance of Christ through the exercise of the virtues, fill my mind with grace, that I may hymn thy divine graces.

Rivers of living water flow from the midst of the faithful, saith the word of God. Wherefore, the ever-flowing springs of thy myrrh are poured forth, whose streams gladden the city of God, which doth glorify thy martyric boldness.

Of old, the staff of Moses, striking the rock in the desert land, released gushing streams of water; and, pierced by a spear, thy body, O Demetrius, hath revealed a wellspring of myrrh, refreshing the new Israel.

O Demetrius, who hast received a recompense for the wounds of thy martyrdom such as eyes have not seen, nor ear heard, thou now pourest forth a sea of myrrh, the rewards of purity, upon the ends of the earth, washing away the passions of our souls.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, finding thee to be an all-undefiled dwelling, the Word of God, made His abode in thy womb; and having anointed with His divinity that which He took from thee, He issued forth One comprising both, and hath been called the Myrrh which was poured forth, for Christ is both God and man.

Katavasia “I shall open my mouth...”

Ode III

Canon of the Earthquake

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

The earth is wounded because of the evils which lie upon us and ever rouse Thine anger against us, O compassionate King of all. But take pity on Thy servants, O Master.

Having shaken it, Thou hast made the earth stable again, O Lord, chastising and converting our weaknesses, desiring to make us steadfast through godly fear of Thee, O Most Blessed One.

O brethren, let us flee sin which hath engendered bitter death, most oppressive earthquakes and unbearable plagues; and let us please God with repentance.

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, who alone art good, we beseech thee: Earnestly entreat the all-good Word, that we may all be delivered from earthquake and wrath.

Canon I of the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Thou didst account the tyrant’s command but naught, for thou didst honor the word of God above all, O passion-bearer.

A splendid lampstand in the midst of the tabernacle of martyrdom wast thou, shining with divine light, O Demetrius, martyr and athlete.

Having acquired thee as a sacred and wondrous fountain of healings and an inviolable treasure, thy city hath been enriched with all gladness.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, restoring the corrupted image of mortals, He Who loveth mankind clothed Himself therein with flesh taken from thee, though remaining as He was before.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Begotten from on high by God, thou wast an heir of divine blessings, being called His son, a co-heir with Christ; and thou dost reign with Him, for thy myrrh is a token thereof, O Demetrius.

Planted by flowing waters like the tree whereof David spake, O glorious one, thou didst put forth the great fruit of martyrdom, and art now shown to be a wellspring of myrrh, which floweth unto the ends of the earth.

Drawing forth the grace of Christ, from Whose side flowed forth blood and water, pierced for His sake, thou didst shed thy blood, and thou now pourest forth fragrant myrrh like water upon our hearts, O Demetrius.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thy sacred and spiritual vessels are full of fragrance and the myrrh of the divine Spirit Who descended upon thee. For, having given birth unto God, thou hast rescued the faithful from the stench of the passions.

Kontakion for the Earthquake, in Tone IV —

Deliver us all from the terrible trembling of the earth, O Lord, and from plagues unbearable on account of our sins. Take pity on the Orthodox people which Thou hast purchased with Thy blood, O Lord and Master, and deliver not this city unto destruction by dreadful earthquake; for we know none other God than Thee, and unto those who hymn Thee hast Thou exclaimed: I am with you, and no one is against you!

Sessional hymn for the greatmartyr , in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph was amazed...” —

With psalms do we cry out to the valiant athlete, the mighty warrior of Christ, Who reigneth over all: Rejoice, adornment and comeliness of martyrs! Rejoice, radiant star of the Church! Rejoice, rampart and refuge of those who have recourse to thee! O glorious greatmartyr Demetrius, from every wound and affliction of the alien save all who hymn thee. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever: sessional hymn of the earthquake, in the same tone: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

Thou hast not despised those who have sinned greatly against Thee, but, chastising them, Thou hast mercifully corrected them. Thou hast caused the earth to quake with Thy divine gaze, O long-suffering Master, in no wise harming all Thy servants, in Thy great loving-kindness. Wherefore, we sing Thy glory with thankful voices and glorify Thee in fear.

Ode IV

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Thou dost shake the earth, O Lord, desiring to make steadfast with true fear all of us who are shaken by the assaults of the lying enemy, O Master.

Thou dost cause all things to quake at thy divine command, and Thou dost strike terror into the hearts of those who live on earth, O Master. Wherefore, calm Thou the waves of Thy righteous wrath, O Lord!

Those who have no fear of Thee in their minds dost Thou terrify by the shaking of the whole earth, O Thou Who alone art merciful. Yet show forth the wonder of all Thy mercies upon us, as is Thy wont.

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee to be a temple of God, O Mistress, in entreaty we stretch forth hands of compunction in thy holy church. Behold our affliction, and grant us aid!

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Beholding thee, the vanquisher of the delusion of ungodliness, the most exalted Word of God hath crowned thee with glory, O Demetrius, who chantest: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having won a victory over delusion, thou didst receive a victor’s crown of righteousness, O Demetrius, crying out to Thy Creator: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Steered by God’s life-bearing hand, thou didst reach the most calm harbors, where, rejoicing, O Demetrius, thou dost now cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* As the most sacred of all created beings, thou alone wast vouchsafed to become the Mother of God; for, in giving birth unto Him, thou hast illumined the world with the grace of knowledge divine.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having washed away all the defilement of thy birth in the laver of regeneration, thou didst show thyself to be one who preserved his purity even unto the end. Wherefore, Christ hath transformed thy natural goodness into myrrh, just as He changed water into wine.

Just as the nature of fire is bestowed upon all, preserving its whole power, so is thy myrrh drawn forth by all, yet remaineth undiminished, O athlete. Wherefore, bowing down in worship, we piously hymn God, Who hath given thee grace.

Who can render Thee audible praises, O Christ, Thou Word of God, beholding the graces which Thou hast bestowed upon Thine athletes? For, lo! the myrrh of the martyr Demetrius floweth like a fountain, and his fragrance wafteth forth, and he dispelleth the gloom of wickedness.

A fountain springing up from the earth gave thee to drink before watering all the face thereof; and having been hidden beneath the earth, thou hast been shown to be a wellspring of fragrant myrrh, O martyr Demetrius; for a multitude of spears opened thy veins, and thou dost now water the ends of the earth.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we know thee to be the Bride and Mother of God, for the Word of God, finding thee to be a fragrant rose blossoming amid the lowly valley of humanity, desired thy beauty and, having issued forth from thee, He hath perfumed the faithful.

Ode V

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

O heart, tremble now, beholding the threat that loometh over thee, and cry out: Take pity on thy people, O Lord and Master, and cause Thy righteous wrath to cease, O Compassionate One.

“O Jesus, give not this people and city, whom Thou hast purchased with Thy blood, over to destruction by troubling the earth with fearsome earthquake,” the choir of the apostles doth entreat Thee.

Having turned away and departed in spirit from Thy straight ways, we have moved Thee, Who art merciful and rememberest not offenses, to displeasure, O Master. Yet be Thou merciful and compassionate unto Thy servants.

*Theotokion:* Now hath the time for aid arrived, O pure one; now is deliverance needed. Pray thou to thy Son and God, that He spare us sinners and deliver us from the wrath which lieth upon us.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Receiving the fire of divine love in thy heart, thou didst quench the fire of the ungodly madness of idolatry, O glorious Demetrius.

Thou hast shown thyself to be one who delivereth us from misfortunes, O Demetrius, protecting by thy supplications those who praise thee with faith and love.

They who earnestly have recourse unto thy temple in faith, O Demetrius, are speedily delivered from infirmities and soul-destroying passions.

*Theotokion:* The Word of God, Who is one in essence with the Father, O Mother of God, hath, in manner past comprehension and recounting, become thy Son, of one essence with thee.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Thou wast a cistern collecting the mercy of Him Who descended from the heavens, as it were rain or dew; and thou didst gush forth with mystical gifts, and now thou dost put forth a wellspring of myrrh from thy tomb, O Demetrius.

Following the practice of athletes, thou didst strip thyself bare, but of all earthly love, O martyr; and thou didst anoint thyself with the oil of grace, and, having vanquished the prince of darkness, thou didst receive as reward the exuding of fragrant myrrh, O Demetrius.

Thou wast shown to be a rose blooming in the midst of the Master’s meadow, O Demetrius, dyed with the blood of thy torment and with the piercings of thy wounds, with thy pangs of suffering and the burning of the furnace; and now thou dost pour forth ever-flowing myrrh.

Lo! the martyr’s temple is again seen to be a divine ark wherein is a lamp, his tomb, which holdeth myrrh and oil, and around which we exult in spirit; and, joining chorus, we praise the great Demetrius.

Wounded with zeal for the love of Christ, like a new Elijah thou dost denounce the emperor and dost give thyself over to death. Yet thou livest and hast shown thy tomb to be a wellspring of myrrh, like unto the inexhaustible cruse of oil.

*Theotokion:* Of old thine ancestor, chanting, described thy mystery and all the glory within the daughter of the King, glorifying thee as her who is blessed among men. Rejoice, thou restoration of the whole world.

Ode VI

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Lacking the boldness to entreat Thy sublimity, O Master, we, the lowly, urge Thy chosen angels to fervent prayer. For their sake remove Thy wrath from us.

Now have we realized how greatly Thou hast desired us great sinners even with our grievous transgressions. Wherefore, we glorify Thee in thanksgiving.

Thou commandest that the foundations of the earth be moved, that we, the lowly, may not cease to be moved by the virtues to a higher state, and that we may be rendered steadfast by the fear of Thee, O Word.

*Theotokion:* O holy Bride of God, by thy maternal supplications take pity now upon thy troubled people, and quickly alter the displeasure of God in our regard, we beseech thee.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Assembling together, we chant thy glorious and luminous memorial which is full of wonders and of the gifts of the honored and holy Spirit, O most blessed one.

By thy supplications loose the bonds of mine offenses, for, as an invincible martyr, thou hast boldness before the Master; and be thou my refuge and protection, O Demetrius.

*Theotokion:* Finding thee, O pure one, to be a most pure lily, a lily of the valley, growing among the thorns, the Bridegroom, the Word, made His abode in thy womb, O Mother of God.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou didst flourish spiritually, like a fruitful olive-tree, and wast violently pressed by the hands of soldiers. But now thou dost comfort the faithful, O Demetrius, pouring forth myrrh from thy divine tomb.

Like a bee, thou didst show thyself to be a cultivator of all the virtues wrought by God, O blessed one, preserving thine immaculate soul like a honeycomb; and now thou pourest forth myrrh, delighting our souls.

Thou didst love Christ with all thy soul and didst follow Him to the myrrh of sweet fragrance; and thou didst partake thereof through a higher union. And now thou pourest forth never-ending streams of myrrh, O Demetrius.

The droplets of the blood of thy sufferings, falling upon the ground, have made it a wellspring of fragrant myrrh. And now thou dost continually pour it out for those who draw it forth, O Demetrius.

Drenched with the outpouring of thy blood, O wise one, like another, new, wellspring, like a river, thou dost richly put forth thy myrrh for the healing of those who ask it and who earnestly approach, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Beholding the golden and ever-burning lamp of the Light, we who have darkened our souls with a multitude of sins draw nigh, for she giveth us illumination and driveth away all darkness.

Kontakion of the Greatmartyr , in Tone II —

He Who gave thee invincible strength, O Demetrius, hath dyed the Church in the streams of thy blood, and hath preserved thy city unharmed, for thou art its confirmation.

*Ikos:* Assembling in faith, let us all hymn the great Demetrius as a warrior and martyr of Christ, crying out together in hymns and songs unto the Master and Creator of the universe: Deliver us from earthquake and want, O Thou Who lovest mankind, at the supplications of the Theotokos and of all Thy holy martyrs, for on Thee do we all set our trust, that we may be delivered from misfortunes and tribulations. For Thou art our confirmation.

Ode VII

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

All-hymned art Thou, O long-suffering Lord, for Thou hast not slain Thy servants by the quaking and dreadful shaking of the earth, but hast frightened them, seeking to turn us all from evils unto life.

Let us give utterance unto groaning from the depths of our hearts, and let us pour forth tears, that we may dissuade Christ, the merciful Master, Who doth threaten us because of the increase of our sins, from destroying us all by earthquake.

Let us cry: Alas! Let us stretch forth our hands unto God Most High, and let us cease to do evil any longer, for, lo! the Savior, in His displeasure, doth shake the whole earth, desiring to make us steadfast.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, look down and save all who hymn thee, for we shall be destroyed in the wrath of God and by the great and dreadful anger, for His threatening hath now come upon us because of our many sins.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

All-adorned with divine glory and grace, O martyr and passion-bearer, thou dost shine forth brilliantly and dost illumine those who cry out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Arrayed in thy blood as in a purple cloak, and holding the Cross instead of a scepter, O glorious one, thou now reignest with Christ, O martyr Demetrius, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* O all-glorious and radiant Mother of God: Protect all who honor thee as the Theotokos, for blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

In prophecy Isaiah commandeth the thirsty to draw forth water, O Demetrius. And if he had seen thy tomb, he would certainly have cried: Come ye to the wellspring of myrrh and draw forth salvation!

Thou wast born of earth and hast made thine abode in the land of the meek, where the water of sweetness is found; and having drunk thy fill thereof, thou now pourest forth an ever-flowing wellspring of myrrh, O Demetrius.

Thou dost grow like the branch of a vine, remaining joined to God, without being cut off. And filled with the ineffable sap thereof, thou now pourest forth myrrh in streams upon all, O Demetrius.

O, thy new struggles! O, the strange sufferings of thy martyrdom! For, accepting the drops of sweat which thou didst pour forth for Him, Christ hath shown thee to be a wellspring of myrrh, O blessed one.

Exuding the flow of thy myrrh, O Demetrius, thou hast spread out a great abyss of miracles and dost drown therein the infirmities of our bodies and souls, stilling every tempest of temptation.

*Theotokion:* With thy milk didst thou nourish thy God, Who was born of thee incarnate, that He might lighten the affliction in hades of Adam, who ate of the tree of knowledge and transgressed God’s commandment.

Ode VIII

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

When this, Thy righteous wrath, descended upon us, O Thou Who lovest mankind, we were confounded and seized by boundless despair, beholding Thee, Who wast displeased with us.

O ye faithful, let us stretch forth our hands and lift up our eyes unto our only Master, Him Who is able to save us, and let us cry: O Christ, avert Thine anger quickly from us, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Thousands of angels, the company of martyrs, prophets and apostles, and the holy choir of the venerable and hierarchs entreat Thee, O Master: Spare Thy lowly people!

O Compassionate One, Who knowest our weakness and that which doth easily fall and is uncorrected within us: Let Thine anger abate; calm this turmoil, and spare the world in Thy mercy.

*Theotokion:* O merciful Theotokos, who gavest birth to the merciful Savior, behold the affliction and the groaning of thy people, and haste thou to offer supplication, that He may have pity on them.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Arrayed for battle with the indelible power of Christ, O glorious one, thou didst blot out all the wrath of the enemy, and as a victor thou didst cry out, O martyr Demetrius: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having shown the steadfastness of the martyrs, thou didst inherit the high station of the martyrs, O martyr, having been washed in the holy laver which is not defiled by further attacks of sin; and, pierced by a spear, thou didst cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The multitude of thy miracles and the gifts that Christ gave thee, which surpass comprehension, are evident to all, O glorious one, and the grace of healings, which transcendeth recounting, clearly proclaimeth thy grace unto us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn the pure Theotokos, who, alone among all generations, is a Virgin Mother; for she is the mediatress of our salvation, in that she gave birth unto the Word, the Deliverer of the world, to Whom we cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

May God reveal thee to those in this world, O Demetrius, as one who hath kept the lamp of thy soul alight, ever filled with the oil of good works. Doors, as of a chamber, have been opened unto thee, and He showeth thee to be an ever-flowing wellspring of divine myrrh, imparting grace thereto as reward for thy purity.

Not of blood, nor of the lust of the flesh, O Demetrius, wast thou born, as the Gospel saith, but of God; for thou dost worship the incarnate God, and zealously exhausting thyself for His sake, thou didst receive wondrous grace from on High, and dost pour forth divine myrrh, perfuming men’s souls.

Thou art shown to be an animate ladder firmly anchored to the ground by pillars of flesh, but reaching to the heavens; for thou wast enriched by God, Who was established within thee, O martyr. And having been shown to be a pillar anointed with the oil of the struggles of martyrdom, thou now pourest forth a wellspring of divine myrrh upon those who approach with faith.

Chanting prophetically, O Demetrius, David described thee as the river of God full of waters; for, lo! the outpouring of thy myrrh is inexhaustible. Wherefore, the watery multitude of rivers lift up their voices and clap their hands to the glory of God, Who hath glorified thee by all of these.

Thou alone art the thrice-holy Lord, O Almighty God, concerning Whom the athlete Demetrius theologized while locked in prison, having slain the noetic serpent with a material lash and cast down the audacity of Lyæus through the godly Nestor; and he was pierced by a spear, and now myrrh floweth forth from his tomb.

*Theotokion:* In place of Adam, the Lord; in place of Eve, thee, O all-pure one; instead of the lying serpent, Gabriel; instead of the tree, the Cross; instead of Eden, the garden of the tomb; Rejoice! instead of grief; the spear instead of the fiery sword, and the purple robe instead of the fig leaves! Therefore, we hymn thee, O Maiden, as the cause of these things.

Ode IX

Canon for the Earthquake

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Behold, we have all sinned, but the earth, which hath not sinned, doth suffer dreadfully; for He Who loveth mankind, chastising us, doth shake it all. Let us come to our senses and take care for our salvation.

As Thou art the Lord of times and seasons, O Master, desiring to lay Thy servants low in the twinkling of an eye, Thou didst yet restrain Thyself in Thy great compassion. And we who are without excuse give Thee thanks, O Thou who alone lovest mankind.

O Christ, from earthquake, the sword, bitter bondage, pagan invasion, defeat, famine, pestilence, and every other affliction deliver Thou Thy city and every land that hymneth Thee in faith.

Groaning, the earth crieth out wordlessly: “Wherefore do ye pollute me with many evils, all ye men? For, sparing you, the Master woundeth me alone. Come, then, to your senses, and move God to mercy by repenting!”

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, who in thy birthgiving received no defilement, thou hast rescued us from corruption and the most grievous earthquake and tribulation, allaying the Master’s displeasure by thy maternal persuasion, O divinely joyous one.

Canon I to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Loose the bonds of the transgressions of those who hymn thee, O passion-bearer; bring an end to the assaults of the passions; cause the tumult of heresies to cease, and still the tempest of temptations by thy supplications.

O crowned martyr Demetrius, guide thy most sacred flock along the straight paths to the kingdom of heaven, to the pasture of salvation, to the eternal fold.

O martyr Demetrius, entreat the Lord, the Bestower of life and King of hosts, those who that hymn thee may obtain crowns of glory and the kingdom of heaven.

*Theotokion:* Trusting in thee, O Virgin, all of us, the faithful, honor thee as the root, the wellspring and source of incorruption; for thou hast poured forth upon us the hypostatic Immortality.

Canon II to the Greatmartyr

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou didst receive a soul like unto an alabaster box filled with the divine myrrh of virtue, and Christ bowed His head toward thee, O martyr; for thy life was calmed by the brilliance of the purity of thy life. Wherefore, thou wast blessed and filled with the grace to pour forth myrrh upon the ends of the earth.

Behold the splendid types of ineffable rewards which await thee! Behold the wellspring of ever-flowing myrrh, O athlete! Wherefore, standing before God with the boldness of a martyr, beg thou victory for Orthodox Christians over their adversaries.

With the sign of the Cross of the Victor thou didst vanquish the savagery of Lyæus, setting over him as victorious thy fellow contender Nestor. And now, do thou subject every barbaric nation to holy Orthodoxy, O Demetrius.

Us who have recourse with fervent love from the depths of our hearts to the shrine of thy relics, which poureth forth rivers of myrrh, O martyr of Christ, do thou deliver from soul-destroying deeds and from the fœtid wave of the passions by thy supplications, and transform them into sweet fragrances before the Lord.

We celebrate a day of spiritual joy, O Demetrius, beholding the outpouring of thy myrrh, which floweth unceasingly. Driving away the gloom of the passions as one filled with divine light, grant that we may walk nobly, as in daylight, that we may behold the unapproachable light of God.

*Theotokion:* Thou, O all-pure one, art a golden dove bearing the Word of God like an olive sprig, anointing thy flesh with the oil of divinity. And the athlete, having taken Him into his heart, as into a coffer, doth pour forth myrrh from his tomb and anoint the faces of the faithful.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “O immutable Light...” —

Thou didst arm Nestor with the Cross, through him destroying the audacity of Lyæus in the stadium, O Demetrius; like Christ, thy side was pierced by a spear, and with it thou hast preserved thy flock. *Twice*

Glory…; Now & ever...:

O Lord, Who lookest down upon the earth from heaven and makest all things to tremble: Deliver us from earthquake through the prayers of the Theotokos, whom Thou hast given to Christians as an intercessor.

On the Praises, 6 stichera to the greatmartyr ; 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...” —

Having been pierced, thou didst wound the adversary with thy spears and didst render him dead and of no effect. Deliver us from his malice, O Demetrius, rendering us ever strong against the tormenting passions by thy sacred entreaties, piercing our hearts and souls with fear of God, O holy one.

Beholding thee to be a river full of spiritual waters, O holy one, we beseech thee: In thy great goodness sacredly bedew our souls, which have wasted away through offenses of the passions; and those amid defilement do thou wash clean, and deliver from manifold misfortunes and eternal torment.

As a most radiant star hast thou shone forth upon the earth in the splendor of miracles; and thou dost ever enlighten the earth, O glorious Demetrius, driving away the gloom of darkness from our souls by thy prayers. Heal thou the infirmities of those who celebrate thy memory with love, O glory and boast of the martyrs.

And 3 in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...” —

O martyr of Christ, come thou to us who ask thy merciful visitation, and deliver those who are afflicted with threats of torment and the mad raging of heresy. For as captives and naked are we persecuted by them, fleeing often from place to place and seeking refuge in the caves and mountains. Therefore, spare us, O all-praised one, and grant us liberty; still the tempest and allay the displeasure which is directed against us, entreating God, Who granteth the world great mercy.

O thou who didst not fear the bondage of the enemy, thou hast been given to us as a rampart, repelling the incursions of barbarians and easing infirmities. An indestructible base and unassailable foundation, a governor, a citizen and champion of thy city wast thou, O Demetrius. O all-blessed one, by thy supplications save it, which now is in grievous danger and is grievously beset, beseeching Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.

The choir of passion-bearers hath appeared, possessed of every virtue, whereby the greatmartyr hath worthily inherited the enjoyment of incorruptible and blessed life. Adorned therein, O right wondrous Demetrius, honored for thine emulation of Christ, and praised for the spear which also pierced thee, pray thou yet more earnestly that He deliver us who honor thee from suffering and grievous circumstances, fervently entreating Him Who granteth the world great mercy.

Glory…: the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone IV —

Let us honor him who, through spears, hath inherited the grace of the Savior’s side, which was pierced by a spear and whence the Savior poureth forth upon the waters of life and incorruption: Demetrius, most wise in teachings and crowned amid torments, who finished the course of suffering with the shedding of his blood and hath shone forth upon the whole world with miracles, who loved the Master and mercifully loved the poor, the intercession for the Thessalonians amid many and exceeding grievous misfortunes. And honoring his annual memorial, let us glorify Christ God, Who for his sake worketh healings for all.

Now & ever: Theotokion —

Deliver us from our wants, O Mother of Christ God, thou who gavest birth unto the Creator of all, that we may all cry out to thee: Rejoice, thou who alone art the intercessor for our souls!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon for the earthquake, and 4 from Ode VI of the 2nd canon to the greatmartyr .

Prokimenon, in Tone VI —

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance.

*Stichos:* Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me.

and that for the Greatmartyr, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

For the Earthquake: Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews, §331, from the Midpoint \(12:6-13, 25-27\).

Brethren: Those whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of His holiness. Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto those who are exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees; and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed. See that ye refuse not Him Who speaketh: for if they escaped not who refused Him Who spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from Him Who speaketh from heaven: Whose voice then shook the earth: but now He hath promised, saying: “Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.” And this word: “Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.”

For the greatmartyr: Reading from the Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy, § 292 \(2:1-10\).

And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Do thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* O God, Thou hast cast us off and hast destroyed us; Thou hast been wroth and hast had pity on us.

*Stichos:* Thou madest the earth to quake and troubled it.

and for the Greatmartyr —

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

For the Earthquake: Reading from the Gospel According to St. Matthew, § 27 \(8:23-27\).

At that time, when Jesus entered into a ship, His disciples followed Him. And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves: but He was asleep. And His disciples came to Him, and awoke Him, saying: “Lord, save us: we perish!” And He said unto them: “Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?” Then He arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. But the men marveled, saying: “What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?”

For the greatmartyr: Reading from the Gospel According to St. John, § 52

\(15:17-16:2\).

The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He who hateth Me hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and my Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law: They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”

Communion Verses —

Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

