The 27th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Nestor of Thessalonica

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Nestor the Chronicler\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 3 stichera of the martyr, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...” —

O wondrous athlete Nestor, thou didst array thyself in the full armor of Christ, and while having contended on earth with Lyæus, thou didst destroy him, with invisible arrows thou didst bring down the invisible Belial and didst slay him. Wherefore, He Who is exceeding generous hath crowned thee with a wreath of victory.

Strengthened with the divine words of the martyr Demetrius, O wise Nestor, with true courage thou didst slay the prideful tyrant; and confessing the immortal God Who died and harrowed hell, thou didst receive an unjust death, O glorious one. Wherefore, rejoicing, thou hast inherited life everlasting.

Thou wast a godly youth, resplendent in comeliness of body, adorned with grace divine, O wise one, and invested with power. Wherefore, having cast down the power of Lyæus by the power of the Almighty, thou didst suffer, rejoicing, and hast been numbered among the choirs of athletes. Rejoicing with them, be thou mindful of us.

Glory..., Now & ever.…: Theotokion —

Thee, our intercessor, do we entreat, O all-pure one: Spurn not us, thy servants, who are troubled amid grief, lest we perish utterly; but haste thou to remove us from this present wrath and grief, O divinely joyous, all-holy and pure one, for our rampart art thou, and our unassailable assistance.

Or this Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross, and willingly accepting Thy Passion, the Virgin, Thy Mother, O Master, cried aloud: “Woe is me, my sweet Child! How dost Thou endure wounds unjustly inflicted, O Physician Who hast healed the sickness of man, and hast delivered all from corruption in Thy tender mercy?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In his sufferings, O Lord, thy martyr Nestor received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at naught his tormentors and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and this canon of the martyr, with four troparia, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* He Who is mighty in battle cast the chariots of Pharaoh and his power into the sea. Let us chant a new hymn, for He hath been glorified!

By thy blood wast thou vouchsafed to mount the fiery chariot, rejoicing, and with joy didst thou ascend to the heights of heaven, where Jesus, the ageless Light, doth dwell.

Having arrayed thyself in the breastplate of faith, O Nestor, and wielding the Cross in thy hands as it were a spear, thou didst mightily hew down legions of the enemy.

Strengthened with the fervor of Christ’s love, thou didst stride forth into the midst of the arena and didst set at naught the wiles of Lyæus and didst win the trophy of victory.

*Theotokion:* In thy womb didst thou conceive Him Who is with the Father is equally without beginning, and in manner transcending nature thou didst give birth unto Him in the flesh, O thou who hast not known man, remaining truly a pure Virgin. Wherefore, we all honor thee.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord Who dost establish the thunder and formest the wind: make me steadfast, that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; for none is as holy as Thee, O our God.

Strengthened with the power of Him Who shattered the gates and portals of hades with might, with zeal didst thou enter into the arena and didst shatter the wiles of the enemy with might.

With thy feet thou didst trample down the ancient author of deception, for as a youth thou didst bend thy neck to be beheaded by the sword, O Nestor, boast of martyrs. Wherefore, we praise thee.

Setting at naught the pride of the most iniquitous, O martyr, thou didst sacrifice a sacrifice unto God, shedding thy sacred blood as an offering. Wherefore, He hath rewarded thee with rich gifts.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, Jesus, Whom thou didst bear in thy womb, having supernaturally transformed the ugliness of the race of Adam which resulted from eating, hath granted us our primal beauty.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV, Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

Thou wast undaunted by the tyranny of the enemy, nor wast thou afraid of the wounding of thy body, but didst hasten fearlessly to the conflict, O wise one, banishing the invincible divine weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, having slain the deceiver straightway, thou wast thyself slain, O Nestor, and, standing before Christ, thou hast been vouchsafed life.

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Though I am a lover of sin, O all-pure one, yet do I beseech thee, who gavest birth unto the sinless God Who taketh away the sins of the world, to have pity on my most sinful soul, and to wash away my many sins; for thou art the cleansing of the sinful, the salvation and preservation of the faithful.

Or this stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, she who in these latter days gave birth unto Thee, Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, cried aloud: “Woe is me, O my most beloved Jesus! How art Thou, O my Son, who art glorified as God by the angels, now crucified by iniquitous men? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thee, O God, and I was afraid; I understood Thy works, O Lord, and I was filled with awe, for the earth is full of Thy praise.

Made radian by the splendid teachings of Demetrius, thou didst escape the gloom of pagan vainglory and wast illumined with the light of martyrdom.

Thou didst stir up the salty sea of unbelief with the sweetness of thy good faith, O martyr, and didst drown an army of the ungodly in the depths of thy blood.

Thou wast shown to be a tree reared up for life, nourishing the fullness of the faithful with the bounty of thy struggles, O Nestor of Christ, thou boast of martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Be thou unto me for the cleansing of sins and extend thou a helping hand unto me who am in distress, O most holy Mistress, sure aid of Christians.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send Thou a radiant dawn upon us, in that Thou art good; and guide us to the fear of Thee, O Master.

Having watered thy thoughts with words of divine understanding, O glorious Nestor, thou didst produce the harvest of martyrdom.

With the healing of thy words, O Demetrius, martyr for Christ, Nestor put an end to the great iniquity of ungodliness.

Locked in combat with a visible foe, thou didst invisibly acquire the help of God, O glorious Nestor.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou who without seed gavest birth unto our God! Rejoice, thou who alone art the all-pure Mother of God! Rejoice, thou Bride unwedded!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The tempest of evil thoughts, having overtaken me, doth drag me down into the abyss of my countless sins; but, going before me, O good Helmsman, govern me and save me, as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah.

Having stamped thy heart with a seal, thou didst courageously wound the heart of Lyæus with the spear of thy valor, O passion-bearer; and, rejoicing, thou wast slain for Christ, the Life of all.

Like a bridegroom didst thou issue forth from the chamber of thy flesh, O wise one; and manifestly arrayed in garments woven of thy sacred blood, O martyr, thou hast taken thy place before Christ the Master.

Having set thy feet upon the rock of piety, Christ, the Rock of life, guided thy steps to Himself, O Nestor, and put thine enemies to shame.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mary, who gavest birth unto God Who taketh away the sin of the world, thou hast broken the chains of my transgression, for on thee have I set my hope of salvation.

Kontakion, in Tone II, Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...” —

Having fought the good fight, thou hast now inherited immortal glory, for thou becamest an excellent warrior of the Master through the supplications of the martyr Demetrius. Wherefore, cease not to pray for us all, O wise Nestor.

*Ikos:* From childhood didst thou tread the path of the Lord, O thrice-blessed one, and didst piously desire His testimonies; and, having zealously taken the Cross upon thy shoulders, O divinely wise Nestor, thou didst destroy the wicked delusion of the madness of idolatry, breaking and destroying the snares and nets of Lyæus. Wherefore, we flee to thy protection with faith, crying aloud: O thou who art most rich, entreat Christ God in behalf of us all!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who spake on the mountain with Moses and revealed an image of the Virgin in the bush.

Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, Who hast illumined the hearts of the faithful with the splendor of the passion-bearer’s struggles.

Having quenched the flame of ungodliness with the dew of thy blood, O divine martyr Nestor, thou dost chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Offering a living sacrifice as an odor of sweet fragrance to the Lord, O martyr Nestor, thou didst cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more holy than the cherubim, O most holy Mistress who gavest birth unto the Word of God Who doth sanctify us.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O earth and all that is therein, O ye seas and every shower and dew, ye heavens of heavens, light and darkness, frost and burning heat, ye children of men and priests: bless ye the Lord, praise and exalt Him supremely forever!

The earth received thy precious blood which was shed for Christ; the heavens received thy soul which was adorned like a bride; and the choirs of martyrs and the souls of all the righteous greeted thee with joy, O martyr.

Oh, thy God-loving soul which reckoned a temporal death to be but naught and chose to live in the Lord! Oh, thy divine courage which prevailed over the cowardice of the foe! For thou hast reproved those who do not confess Christ!

Having fought the good fight, thou didst truly finish thy course, O wise martyr, and didst keep the faith. And now a crown of righteousness doth lie before thee, which Christ shall give thee forever.

*Theotokion:* I fear not the pursuit of the enemy, for I have thy help; I fear not evil men, but flee to thee, O Theotokos. For in thee do I boast, and in thee do I cross the wall of sin, saved by thy prayers.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* For He Who is mighty hath magnified me; and holy is His name. And His mercy is on those who fear Him, throughout all generations.

In sacred manner hast thou arrayed thyself in a purple cloak dyed in thy blood; and, holding the Cross in thy right hand as a scepter, thou dost reign with Christ, O blessed Nestor.

Thou art shown to be a ripe cluster on the noetic Vine; and, squeezed out by the winepress of martyrdom, thou hast poured forth the wine of compunction upon us who ever praise thee.

Joining chorus with the angels in the presence of Jesus and delighting in His glory, O Nestor, be thou ever mindful of those who with faith keep thine honored memory.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast revealed as the abode of the Light which hath truly driven away the gloom of the ancient ignorance, O pure one, ark of holiness and golden candlestick, O thou who art more spacious than the heavens.

Exapostilarion, Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...” —

By the power of the Cross and the supplications of Demetrius, the glorious martyr, thou didst cast down the greatness of the ungodly Lyæus and the pride of the enemy, O Nestor, having first vanquished the passions; and thou wast shown to be an excellent martyr for Christ, O wise sufferer.

Glory..., Now & ever.…: Theotokion —

Saved by thee, O Theotokos, we hymn thee as an invincible weapon, an unassailable rampart, a tower of all strength, a haven of salvation, a truly divine foundation, and the bridge which leadeth from earth to heaven.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians

§ 233 \(6:10-17\).

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to St. Luke, § 106

\(21:12-19\).

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

