The 28th Day Of The Month Of October

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs

Terence & Neonilla

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Stephen The Sabbaïte, The Composer Of Canons

\(for this day we provide also the services in honor of the holy martyr Parasceva and our venerble father Job of Pochaev\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Manfully withstanding multifarious torments, ye put down the uprisings of the enemy, confessing before the tyrants Him Who for our sake appeared in the coarseness of the flesh, Who willingly endured His all-pure sufferings and hath poured forth upon the world enlightenment and dispassion, O blessed ones.

With Terence shone forth the glorious Neonilla, the wondrous Nitas and Sarbilus, and with them Photus and Hierax: who suffered lawfully, quenched the fire of torments with the divine dew of the Spirit, and became pillars of piety, right-acceptable sacrifices and all-pure offerings.

Like a sun of surpassing brilliance thou didst join with the moon, Neonilla, and didst beget, O Terence, a choir of seven stars who were stained with the blood of martyrdom and emit splendid radiance, and who have made their abode in never-waning peace, where the team of all the athletes joineth chorus in splendor.

And 3 stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Sp. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O God-bearing father Stephen, having most splendidly strengthened thy mind with thought of God, with righteousness thou didst apply all the power of thy soul against anger with courage and against desire with chastity. And with love of wisdom thou didst fashion an all-comely chariot of the virtues, and, seated therein, thou didst ascend on high, rejoicing, O glorious one.

O God-bearing father Stephen, thou didst enlighten thy mind with theology, directing thine anger like a spear against the blasphemous heretics, O venerable father; and, desiring the food of heaven, thou hast been vouchsafed to partake thereof, O wondrous one, standing before the throne of the Almighty, the King of all.

O God-bearing father Stephen, ever satisfying thy mind with abstinence, thou didst cause it to hasten to the prime Cause, and didst spurn the tumult of the world, avoiding the turmoil thereof, truly combining purity of mind with most sublime desire, O most wise one, who art venerable and divinely wise.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion: in the same tone & melody —

Thee do I beseech, the vessel of virginity and the pure, beauteous and most honored habitation of God: Calm thou my soul, which hath been afflicted with the venom of the serpent and slain by disobedience, that I may glorify thee who hast magnified all the faithful, O divinely joyous one.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same tone & melody —

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who sustainest all creation art uplifted upon the Tree and diest, granting life unto all!” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she beheld the God and man Who had shone forth from her ineffably suspended upon the Cross.

Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. Through their supplications, save Thou our souls.

Glory…: Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII —

O instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon of all the world, divinely inspired adornment of monastics: O all-wise Stephen, by thy doctrines thou hast enlightened all. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos; and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the martyrs, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Tempest-tossed on the abyss of sin, O Thou Who lovest mankind, I lift up the eyes of my heart to the only abyss of Thy compassion: Direct and save me through the supplications of the athletes.

The never-waning Sun showed you to be stars in the firmament of His Church, illumining the fullness thereof with the radiance of your struggles, O all-praised martyrs.

Terence and Nitas, Sarbilus, Theodulus and Hierax, Neonilla and the wondrous Bele, Eunice and Photus became champions of the Faith, the foundation of the Church.

*Theotokion:* In that thou didst receive the fullness of the whole Godhead, O most immaculate one, thou hast been shown to be the mediatress of joy for us; wherefore, with the angels we all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O divinely joyous one.

Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

With divine light dispel thou all the darkness of my despondency, O father Stephen, granting me the divine grace to hymn thy memory.

Thou didst have a taste for the virtues alone, O Stephen, for thou didst utterly reject the evil of the world, cleaving unto God from childhood.

Bringing thyself wholly to Christ the Savior as a splendid sacrifice through abstinence, O glorious one, in God-pleasing manner thou becamest a partaker of life immortal.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Theotokos, joy of all, O undefiled one who contained God within thy womb, pray thou, that we who hymn thee may be delivered from our enemies.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Uniting himself to Neonilla, like the sun to the most radiant moon, the glorious Terence begat a choir of seven martyrs of Christ like stars.

The breaking of thy limbs crushed the bones of falsehood like dust, O athlete Terence, and won for thee ineffable glory.

Having furnished thyself with wings of gold, O Eunice, thou didst elude the wiles of the iniquitous pursuers and hast come to dwell within the noetic bridal-chamber.

*Theotokion:* Having acquired thee as a most pure habitation, the Wisdom of God became incarnate of thy pure blood and showed thee forth as incorrupt even after birthgiving.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Plant Thou the fear of Thee in the hearts of Thy servants, O Lord, and be Thou the confirmation of us who call upon Thee in truth.

From thy childhood the desert purified thee through the forethought of God, O Stephen, who avoided the carnal passions which defile men’s souls in this life.

The ascetics whose life was heavenly, receiving thee, O blessed one, made thee steadfast in divine wisdom through the fear of the Lord.

Submitting to the patristic teachings of wisdom, O father, thou didst set the fear of God as the foundation of thy heavenly life.

*Theotokion:* Without seed thou didst conceive the Savior and Lord Who delivereth from corruption us who truly hymn thee, O Bride of God.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

Thou didst plant a garden of the virtues and irrigate it with the torrents of thy tears, O most glorious one. Having received the tree of life, O Stephen, save thy flock from corruption by thy supplications and deliver from evil circumstances those who fervently honor thee; for through faith and love, O wise one, we have acquired thee as an intercessor most great.

Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

As radiant stars shine with the sun, the sacred children of Terence manifestly shine with him and illumine creation, shining with valor in their courageous struggles; and they dispel the night of polytheism. With gladness and faith let us bless them as favorites of God, and cry aloud: O most lauded athletes, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…” —

Having adorned thy life with abstinence and mortified the passions, thou didst trample the assaults of the enemy underfoot, O father Stephen; and, offering thyself to God, thou wast shown to be a worker of wonders, joining chorus with the angels in everlasting glory. With them do thou unceasingly pray that we find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, sure and unashamed hope, protection and refuge of those who have recourse to thee: With the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant to the world peace, salvation and great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee hanging of Thine own will upon the Cross between the thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother said maternally, her womb rent asunder: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art nailed unjustly to the Cross like a malefactor, desiring to bring life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Steered by the hand of the Almighty, ye traversed the deep of torments without foundering, until ye reached the calm haven of the kingdom on high, O martyrs.

O most lauded martyrs, with the weaponry of faith ye brought low the prideful tyrant who vaunted himself in the might of his ungodliness; and ye chanted: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The choir of the seven brethren with their two parents were an unblemished sacrifice to Thee Who wast wondrously slain for their sake, O Christ Master, and brought themselves to Thee like lambs.

*Theotokion:* He Who created all things by His will desired to take form through thee in manner past recounting, O thou who knewest not wedlock, saving those who cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Thou didst make all the wisdom of thy flesh subject to the divine laws of the Spirit, O wise Stephen, and by thy discourse hast driven off the irrational assaults of the passions.

O Stephen, with waves of wrath thou didst assail the enemy, setting thy desire upon God alone, Whom thou didst love.

Thou didst behold the radiant light of dispassion, O venerable Stephen, and, guided by grace, didst cast off the gloomy darkness of the passions.

Pondering in thy mind the things that are to come, thou didst spurn the senselessness of transitory things. Wherefore, through thy pangs thou hast inherited all that is everlasting.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin, entreat God to Whom thou gavest birth, that He grant thy servants forgiveness of offenses and deliverance from the adversary.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Having acquired Thee as their strength, O Lord, the martyrs manfully overcame maiming, wounds, the fire and death.

O sacred children! O God-pleasing immolations! O company who have set at naught the subtle wiles of the enemy who wageth war against us!

Thou didst crown thy head with immortal victories, O goodly virgin Eunice, vanquishing the serpent who vanquished Eve.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, thou gavest birth for us to the timeless Light, the Effulgence of the Father, Who in the richness of His goodness came under time.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou art shown to be like a luminary shining forth from the heavens upon those who hymn thee, driving away the darkness of evil deeds and disclosing the radiance of divine activity.

O father Stephen, thou didst attain vigilant prayer and standing all night, the earnest uplifting of thy hands and wellsprings of tears.

Thou hast been truly been shown to be a radiant beacon of the desert, O Stephen, enlightening those held fast in the darkness of evils.

*Theotokion:* Ever beseech thy Son and our God, O pure Mary who knewest not wedlock, that He send down mercy upon us, the faithful.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Mercilessly commanding that the martyrs be stretched out and bound to wheels for multifarious tortures, the tyrant was put to shame, seeing them to be invincible.

Cast to the wild beasts for them to devour, O saints, by your unceasing supplications ye made them more tame than lambs, and were in nowise harmed by them.

Let Sarbelus, Neonilla, Photus and Theodulus, Bele, Hierax and Eunice, the godly Nitus and Terence be piously praised as valiant martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Surrounded on all sides by fire, yet in nowise consumed, the bush prefigured the great mystery of thy birthgiving which passeth understanding, O most hymned Virgin.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the sea monster, O Lord. Save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

Thou wast seen feeding a doe with thine own hands, O Stephen; for, having shaken off the passions of the soul, thou didst come to have dominion over wild beasts as Adam had of old in Eden.

Preparing thine inward parts as a habitation for Christ in the chamber of thy soul, O Stephen, and restraining thy tongue, thou didst utterly mortify the carnal pleasures.

Thou wast crowned with the victor’s crowns of asceticism, O Stephen; for thou didst vanquish hordes of the demons and set at nought the assaults of the passions, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* In manner past understanding thou didst render the Lord, Who became incarnate in thy womb, merciful to thy servants through thy supplications, O pure one, that we may be delivered from dread torment.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

Today the honored memorial of the martyrs, Terence the all-wise and his company, hath arrived, bringing gladness to all; wherefore, let us receive healing, for they have received from the Holy Spirit the grace to heal the infirmities and pain of our souls.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Cast into the furnace of torments, O martyrs, by your patience ye obtained dew from heaven, crying out in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Having the wisdom of their souls made fast to the rock of the immutable Faith of Christ, by their supplication the martyrs called forth an earthquake, setting at nought the savagery of the ungodly.

Suspended aloft, your sides grievously maimed, most cruelly given vinegar to drink and burned with fire, O blessed and glorious ones, ye consumed all falsehood like tinder.

*Theotokion:* He Who clotheth the sky with clouds hath shown thee to be heaven on earth, O all-pure one, for through thee He clothed Himself wholly in man and doth deify me in His boundless loving-kindness.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who bedewed the children in the furnace and preserved her who gave Thee birth a Virgin after birthgiving!

The grace of the incorrupt Trinity, truly finding thee to be a chosen vessel, as it desired, O Stephen, rested in thee, enriched thee with gifts and hath shown thee to be a physician healing the passions of the soul.

O initiate of the mysteries of the all-radiant Godhead, seer partaking of the ineffable glory of God: Grant enlightenment to us who celebrate thy memory with faith, O all-blessed Stephen, favorite of Christ.

Tracing the sign of the Cross in the dry earth with thy staff, like Moses, O Stephen, thou didst cause water to pour forth for thy thirsty disciple, chanting to Christ Almighty: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* It was fitting that thou pass over to Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, O pure and undefiled Mary, having shone forth more brightly than the sun; for thou didst bear God Almighty in thine arms, O blessed one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The godly martyrs, receiving divine coolness from heaven, braved the fire, illumined with the light of the divine Spirit, and showed the boiling of the cauldrons to be of no effect. Let us praise them as is meet, O ye faithful.

A multitude of angels appeared, manifestly strengthening you in the arena, O most lauded martyrs, and taking away your pain; and with them ye cry aloud the hymn of the youths: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having the eye of thy heart directed vigilantly toward God, O Sarbelus, thou didst endure the plucking out of thine eyes, denouncing the tyrant who was held fast in the darkness of ungodliness. Wherefore, we all bless thee as a child of the Day.

*Theotokion:* At the Father’s good pleasure thou didst receive the Son in thy womb when thou wast overshadowed by the divine Spirit, O all-pure one; and having given birth, thou didst remain all-pure as thou wast before. To Him do thou pray unceasingly, O Virgin, that all be delivered from corruption and tribulation.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* When the musical instruments sounded and innumerable were those who worshipped the image in Dura, the three youths, refusing to obey the tyrant’s command, hymned and glorified the Lord for all ages.

Thou didst submit to the Lord in the constancy of thy blameless life, O blessed one, and, strengthened thereby, thou didst subdue the enemy and trample them under thy feet, wielding thy pangs like weapons against them.

Possessing a consistent life, simple and upright habits, an innocent demeanor and a God-loving mind, thou didst show forth the word of truth; wherefore, hymning thee, we exalt Christ supremely forever.

Thou didst love God with all thy soul, O father, and didst turn away from tumult; and going about the trackless deserts, thou didst please Him Whom thou didst love alone, for Whose sake thou didst account all things as but dung.

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee fully to be the Virgin Mother of God in manner past recounting, we hymn thee most piously, chanting with faith: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Ye have been shown to be a garden of paradise having in your midst the tree of life, a wellspring pouring forth drops of healing, and a river truly full of the divine waters of the Spirit, O saints.

O martyrs, ye have been shown to be pillars of the Church of Christ, most tranquil havens for those who are tempest-tossed on the abyss of evils, nurturers of the world and companions of the angels.

Ye dwell with joy in the mansions of heaven, gazing together upon inconceivable beauties and enjoying true deification, O crowned ones of great renown.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos who art more spacious than the heavens, holier than the cherubim and more honorable than all creation: Entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth, in behalf of us who honor thee.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O ye people, with glory let us honor the pure Theotokos, who received the fire of the Godhead in her womb without being consumed, and let us magnify her with hymns.

Thou didst tread the narrow path than which nought in the world is more needful; wherefore, thou hast entered into Eden, the spacious place of rest.

Thou hast been shown to be fortunate, O blessed Stephen, for as is meet thou hast been crowned in the heavens with a wreath of glory, hymning Him Who crowned thee.

Thy wondrous life hath shone forth, as fragrant as a rose in a garden, radiantly illumining those who honor thee like a beacon in the air, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O ye faithful, in hymns let us all magnify the Virgin Theotokos Who ineffably bore God the Savior in her womb.

