Also on The 28th Day of the Month of October

Commemoration of Our Venerable and God-bearing Father Job, Abbot and Wonderworker of Pochaev

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…,” 4 stichera, in Tone VII —

The day of God’s good pleasure hath dawned, and the feast of gladness. Let us therefore make haste to Mount Pochaev, O ye faithful, and let us hymn the most blessed Job, celebrating his honored memory.

Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, O venerable one, pleasing the Lord with vigils of prayer and a life of asceticism. Wherefore, with joy we celebrate thy memory, O most honored one.

Come, ye faithful, to holy Mount Pochaev, where the favored one of God struggled during his lifetime, and ascended from glory to glory; and let us now pray unto him that, having made his abode in the mansions of heaven, he pray to the Lord for the salvation of our souls.

A city set upon the brow of a hill cannot be hid; and though thou restest in thine incorrupt body in a dark cave of stone, O venerable one, yet dost thou summon all to Mount Pochaev for thy splendid festival, entreating Christ God that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone VI —

O most holy Theotokos, forsake me not during the time of my life, and entrust me not to the intercession of man; but do thou thyself help and have mercy on me.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI —

Celebrating thy memory today, O venerable Job our father, we cry out to thee: Standing with the angels in great boldness, O father, entreat Christ the Master in behalf of us all.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Thy feast hath appeared as a dawning and radiant day, enlightening the hearts of us who with faith praise thine honored struggles, O Job, our father.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Having found the most precious icon of the Mother of God on the mountain of Pochaev to be like the sun upon the earth, thou didst show thyself to be its most splendid star. Wherefore, through the supplications of the Theotokos, with the light of knowledge divine illumine us who hymn thee, O Job, our father.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

On thee do I set mine every hope, O Mother of God. Keep me under thy protection.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Acquiring the patient endurance of the long-suffering forefather, emulating the asceticism of the Baptist, and sharing in the divine zeal of both, thou wast vouchsafed worthily to receive their names, and wast a fearless preacher of the true Faith. Wherefore, thou didst lead a multitude of monks to Christ, and didst confirm all the people in Orthodoxy. O Job our venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…,” 8 stichera: 4 in Tone I —

The day of thy commemoration is come, O all-glorious Job, and the land of Volhynia is filled with joy; for, made steadfast in Orthodoxy by thy teachings and instructed in piety by thy struggles, it trusteth in thy supplications, O venerable father, whereby do thou ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls. *Twice*

The assemblies of monastics join chorus at thy glorious commemoration and are aflame with zeal for thy God-pleasing life, O favorite of Christ; and bowing down before thine incorrupt relics, with us they cry out to thee as to one alive: O father Job, who art merciful and of kindly disposition, ask of the Lord peace for the world and great mercy for our souls!

Who doth not marvel at thy long-suffering life, O venerable father? For in three monasteries have thine all-glorious deeds been proclaimed: thy fasting, tears and vigils, thy seclusion within a cave, thine harsh treatment of thyself in all things, yet also thy compassionate love for thy brethren, forgiveness of thieves, and goodly instruction of all people.

And 4 stichera in Tone II —

With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the venerable Job, the teacher and champion of the Orthodox faith, the herald of the divine Scriptures and recorder of the traditions of the Fathers, yet also the fulfiller of onerous tasks, who humbled himself in digging earth and planting trees, and was a model of obedience for all? Him doth Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, now crown with unfading glory. *Twice*

With what worthy thanks shall we glorify Job, the boast of Pochaev and adornment of the whole land of Russia? For by his prayers he called down the light of heaven into his cave, and even after his repose he appeareth from heaven and offereth up supplication for the people of his flock. For there doth Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, crown him with glory.

With what tears of compunction shall we render our corrupt hearts contrite, beholding the incorrupt body of Job, which even after death is preserved as though alive, yet during his lifetime remained as though dead, worn out by fasting and vigils? Let us then strive to emulate his struggles, that Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, may have mercy upon us in the life which is to come.

Glory…, in Tone III —

The venerable Job followed Thy words, O Lord, and all the beautiful things of this world did he reckon as dung. Sparing not his youth, he gave himself over to monastic obedience from childhood. Wherefore, having vanquished the wiles of the demons, he was shown to be a hard diamond of Orthodox piety, and by his struggles doth enlighten his whole land. By his supplications spare thou also our souls, and grant us the goodly resolve to repent before the end.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

How can we not marvel at thy giving birth to the God-man, O all-honored one. For without having accepted the temptation of a man, O all-immaculate one, without a father thou gavest birth in the flesh to a Son Who was begotten without a mother before the ages, without His undergoing change, confusion or division, and yet preserved intact the character of both essences. Wherefore, O Virgin Mother and Mistress, entreat Him, that the souls of those who in Orthodox manner confess thee to be the Theotokos be saved.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII —

Come, all ye assemblies of the Slavs, let us glorify him who was zealous for our common salvation, the fearless denouncer of heresy, the feeder of the poor and meek reprover of sinners, who showed forth the zeal of Paul for the people and hath acquired great boldness before the Lord: for even after his repose he healeth the infirm and repelleth the audacious assaults of the barbarians; and he filleth us with thoughts of compunction, and ever prayeth for the salvation of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Thy Lavra joineth chorus today, O venerable father Job, and all the people strive to venerate thy relics; the demons tremble before thy grace, the angels rejoice at thine aid, and we unceasingly cry out: By thy supplications make steadfast the Faith of the Orthodox, set our life aright, and ask salvation for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone VI —

On thee do I set mine every hope, O Mother of God. Keep me under thy protection.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V —

Rejoice, O Job, thou sacred one, adornment of the land of Volhynia! For thou seest it made steadfast in the Orthodox Faith, praying to thee as to one alive, and imploring thine aid against the demons. Be thou for it an invincible ally, and an advocate for the whole world.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O venerable Job, thou sacred one, star which proceeded from the land of Galicia to the east and made strong the souls of the helpless, who in thy humility hast taught the Russian people boldness against heresy, and hast led them to the kingdom of heaven, which do thou also vouchsafe unto us by thine intercession; and be thou an advocate for the whole world.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Rejoice, O sacred one, whom the Lord hath set over the land of Volhynia, to whom the princes and the people submitted themselves. And we, thy spiritual children, falling down before thee with contrite heart, O venerable Job, entreat thee for aid in overcoming the passions, for courage amid tribulations, for the continual remembrance of the hour of death, and for thy supplications in behalf of the whole world.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

O Job our father, we honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, for in thy steps have we truly learned to walk in righteousness. Blessed art thou who, having labored for Christ, didst put to shame the power of the enemy, O converser with angels and companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them beseech the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Acquiring the patient endurance of the long-suffering forefather, emulating the asceticism of the Baptist, and sharing in the divine zeal of both, thou wast vouchsafed worthily to receive their names, and wast a fearless preacher of the true Faith. Wherefore, thou didst lead a multitude of monks to Christ, and didst confirm all the people in Orthodoxy. O Job our venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…,” the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Responding to the call of the Lord, thou didst forsake thy parents’ home, and didst pass from a sheltered life to one yet more greatly restricted; but thy heart is not so confined that it cannot hold all who flee unto thee. Wherefore, thy spiritual children have multiplied and rejoiced in the Lord, Whom do thou entreat, O Job our father, that He save the souls of those who honor thy holy memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

By thy divine birthgiving hast thou renewed the mortal nature of men which hath been corrupted by the passions, O pure one; and thou hast raised all up from death to the life of incorruption. Wherefore, we all bless thee as is meet, O most glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone V —

Let us honor the venerable Job, the cave-dwelling recluse who kept vigil in prayer, who from childhood to old age humbled himself and glorified the Holy Church, who led thieves and malefactors to repentance, and prayeth fervently in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Awesome is the wonder of thy conceiving, and ineffable the manner of thy birthgiving, O pure Ever-virgin. My mind is stricken with awe, and my reason is amazed! Thy glory, O Theotokos, extendeth in all things, unto the salvation of our souls.

Polyeleos, and this Magnification —

We bless thee, O Job, our venerable father, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses —

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

Having acquired pastoral wisdom through humility of mind, thou didst become a teacher for many, a father to monks and comforter of those who sorrow, an instrument of the prayer of Jesus which never falleth silent; wherefore, the Lord Who granteth rewards hath glorified thee in the incorruption of thy relics. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Let us hymn the portal of heaven and the ark, the most holy mountain, the radiant cloud, the bush unburnt, the reason-endowed garden of paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of the whole world; for in her was wrought the salvation of the world and the remission of the ancient offenses. Wherefore, we cry out to her: Entreat thy Son, that He grant remission of sins unto those who piously bow down before thy most holy birthgiving.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

A Reading from the Gospel according to Matthew, §43 \(11:27-30\).

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia; and that of the venerable one, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is the Slavonic alphabet; in Tone VIII —

Ode I

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before. The water engulfed the cruel enemy; and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O Word of God, overlooking my transgressions and granting utterance unto my mouth, help me worthily to hymn the venerable Job, the earthly angel and heavenly man, the boast of Volhynia.

O venerable one, thou wast truly an all-radiant beacon for the world, pointing out the way of salvation unto all. Wherefore, be thou also a helper for me, that I may glorify thy life and acquire compunction.

In the home of thy parents didst thou first come to know the Lord, O glorious Job; and while but a child thou didst show forth perfect wisdom when thou didst choose the monastic life; and, disdaining all the things of life, thou didst love the one God.

Lifting up thine eyes and soul, in a life pleasing unto God thou didst quickly surpass the brethren in the Ugornitsky Monastery, holding thyself to be the least of all, and thereby showing thyself to Jesus to be the greatest, being a most beloved model for old and young alike.

Calling thee to mind, who didst battle well against the demons, O venerable one, I am ashamed of my slothfulness and am afraid of the multitude of my sins; but by thy supplications, O holy one, grant me the good desire to finish the rest of my life in repentance.

*Theotokion:* In that thou art the Mother of God, who hast boldness before the only-begotten Word Who was born of thee, and before His Father Who is equally without beginning, and the consubstantial Spirit, cease not to pray, O all-immaculate one, that those who glorify thee as the Theotokos may be saved from tribulations.

Katavasia as prescribed by the Typicon.

Ode III

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord, and my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies, and I am glad in Thy salvation.

O venerable father, there is within me a desire for goodly reformation; but—Woe is me!—I have not learned to overcome the temptations of slothfulness. Yet, trusting in thine aid, I fend off the thoughts of despondency and direct my gaze at thy glorious struggles.

Zhelezo was thy family called, O venerable Job, a name which signifieth iron, portending the strength of thy soul; yet, having shut thyself up in a cave of stone like hidden gold, thou didst sanctify the place of thy struggles and didst show the mountain of Pochaev to be a wall of brass against the enemies of Orthodoxy.

Exceeding deep went thy thoughts concerning the kingdom of heaven, when, while yet a child, thou didst receive the angelic habit. Wherefore, having been a faithful priest of God, thou dost even now offer up entreaties in behalf of the people, O venerable Job.

The land of Galicia doth glory in thy youth, the Monastery of Dubno proclaimeth the struggles of thy manhood, and the Pochaev Monastery boasteth of thine old age and rejoiceth in thy blessed end. And the world is gladdened and joineth chorus because of thy wonders.

O saint, who art the bestower of good things upon all who pray to thee: Reject me not who am fallen prostrate; but, beholding my repentance, grant me reformation of life, and inspire within me the zeal to emulate thy deeds which are beloved of God.

*Theotokion:* Raise up my deadened mind through the power of life which hath been made manifest to the world through thee, O pure one, and guide it to life, O thou who alone hath broken down the gates of death by thy birthgiving.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

Today is the Monastery of Pochaev filled with joy, glorifying thy life which is beloved of God. Today are the Christian people enlightened with zeal for salvation, beholding thy relics which have been glorified with incorruption, O venerable one. Today sinful passions are driven away, and thoughts of repentance embrace our souls, wherewith do thou make steadfast all who honor thy memory with faith, O all-glorious one.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer who knewest not man, as the receptacle of the Comforter, O most hymned one, haste thou to deliver me, who am the vile abode of iniquity and have in mind become the plaything of demons, from their malice, and make of me a splendid habitation of the virtues, O radiant and incorruptible one; and by thy supplications drive away the cloud of the passions and vouchsafe unto me the fellowship of the Most High and the never-waning light.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* The prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming with noetic eyes, O Lord; wherefore, he cried aloud: God shall come out of Thæman! Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

O venerable Job, be thou a fervent advocate for all who believe in thine aid, who bitterly lament their life and trust in the loving-kindness of God, even as they are tossed to and fro by the attractions of this life.

Who among men doth not marvel at thy long-suffering life, O father? Who doth not glorify thy zeal for Orthodoxy? For like a hard diamond thou didst withstand the heretics, and by thy words and writings didst deliver unto all the preaching of the true Faith.

The roaring lion which seeketh to devour the souls of the saved didst thou vanquish by thy supplication, O father, and to repentance didst thou bring those who served him, putting to shame and admonishing thieves with thy loving-kindness, filling robbers with fear with thy reproof, and teaching saving repentance unto all.

The gloom of my soul do thou disperse by thine intercession, O father, and illumine my wretched heart with the light of the Lord’s commandments that, following thy disciples, I remain not bereft of their portion, praising thy holy memory.

*Theotokion:* Entreat God Who was incarnate of thee, and Who remaineth immutably what He was, is of the same essence as the Father, and Who became one in nature with thee who gavest Him birth, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions and salvation of soul unto those who hymn thee with faith.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Dispel the gloom of my soul, O Christ God, Bestower of light, Who drove away the primal darkness of the abyss; and grant me the light of thy commandments, O Word, that, rising at dawn, I may glorify Thee.

“Thou art truly our intercessor and a most splendid wonderworker!”, cried Dionysius, who found thy relics to be untouched by corruption; and venerating them, we cry out: Disdain not our defilement, O favorite of God, but cleanse us of them by thy supplications!

Taught the precepts of God from thy youth, thou didst mightily desire to turn away from the vanity of life, O father, and didst love solitude; yet, not opposing the command of Christ, thou didst teach right confession and life according to the Gospel unto those who had recourse unto thee.

Even after thy repose hast thou been shown to be an intercessor for the suffering and sorrowful. For thus the people beheld thee issuing forth from thy tomb and praying in the midst of the church with angels. O truly all-glorious wonder! O joy and confirmation of the faithful!

As a lover of the kingdom of heaven, thou art assured of access thereto, and art shown to be one who hath passed over to the higher life devoid of pain and fear, and to be the teacher and hope of thy brethren.

Be thou the companion of my life, O father Job; hedge my sorely troubled soul round with thy prayers, and lead it into the kingdom of heaven, having won pity for itself by thy struggles, and offering up tears of repentance unto Christ.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as a rampart, and protected by thine intercession, we bless thee, boasting in thy divine glory; for thou, O most pure one, dost pour forth joy and gladness upon our souls.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the whale, O Lord; save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

I place steadfast hope in thine intercession, O venerable one, and pray with faith: Grant me victory over the cruel passions, unceasing remembrance of death, and a desire for the blessedness of the age to come.

The holy Church is made steadfast by thee, O venerable one, and every heresy is put to shame, having as its reproof thy much-healing relics and thy century-long life of toil, thy pangs, tears, fasting, and the falling away of thy flesh from thy bones.

The venerable Job triumphed over the noetic Pharaoh, cleaving ever unto obedience, and willingly coming to the aid of those who were tempest-tossed, thus illumining three monasteries with his teaching and glorifying them with many struggles, gladdening Him Who loveth mankind, the Savior of all.

Job emulated the humility of Christ when he accepted the abbacy as a ministry unto all; and as abbot he exerted himself in onerous labors, and was for the brethren a model of meekness, an example of industry, and a constant reminder of prayer.

By thy supplications deliver me from the vile passions, granting me victory over them through a continual invocation of divine help, by placing no trust in myself, and by not judging my brother.

*Theotokion:* Fallen human nature hast thou most truly raised up, O Mother of God, having borne in thy womb without seed the Son, Who, though visible, is immutable in His divine form and His equality with the Father.

Kontakion, in Tone IV, Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today to the whole world…” —

Thou wast shown to be a pillar of the true Faith, a zealot of the commandments of the Gospel, the reproof of pride, and an intercessor and instructor for the lowly. Wherefore, beg thou forgiveness of sins for those who bless thee, and preserve thy monastery unharmed, O Job our father, who art like unto the long-suffering one of old.

*Ikos:* Open thy mouth, O cave of stone, and tell us: How oft wast thou washed with the streams of Job’s tears? How is it that his sighs did not rend thy walls asunder? Why did the divine light not set thee afire? How did the angels marvel at Job’s feats of vigilance? For thereby have the lands of Galicia and Volhynia been sanctified. And, pondering all these things, we fill our eyes with tears of compunction, for the venerable Job is a wondrous saint, like unto the long-suffering one of old.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* On the plain of Dura the tyrant once set up a furnace for the torment of the God-fearing, but therein the three children hymned the one God; and the three of them chanted, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Against the foe strengthen the Orthodox hierarchs who call thee blessed, O venerable Job, and put it in their hearts to strengthen the Church. And for all of us beseech God to grant us oneness of mind, love one for another, and zeal for Orthodoxy.

I am unable to drink of the cup of thy life, wretch that I am, O Lord; but, twined about by the thorns of the passions and the fear of tribulations, yet do I pray: Have mercy upon me through the prayers of Job, Thy favored one, and help me to shake off sinful sloth.

Disdaining the broad path which leadeth to the destruction of the soul, O venerable Job, thou didst confine thyself within a narrow cave and didst not turn aside from the straight path when thou wast abbot, remaining day and night in prayer and labors, giving beneficial instruction to all who came to thee.

Thou wast compassionate to the poor, merciful to the penitent, and a meek teacher for those in need of instruction, a lover of divine wisdom, a preacher of the commandments of the Gospel, a printer of books and a fearless denouncer of heresy.

*Theotokion:* Let us praise Mary, the all-pure and most holy; for through her is the grace of the gifts of the Spirit poured forth upon us in manner past understanding, as from a torrent of divine goodness. Let us bless her now with pious resolve.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Thou Who coverest Thy chambers with waters and settest the sands as a bound for the sea: Thee doth the sun hymn; Thee doth the moon glorify; and unto Thee doth all creation offer a hymn forever, as to the Creator of all.

Be thou a bestower of spiritual gifts upon the countless people who ride and walk to thy monastery and fall down before thy relics; be thou a healer of their bodily ailments and a fervent intercessor for all before the Savior, O Job, thou glory and adornment of the land of Volhynia.

Thou wast a youth in body, but an elder in mind at the outset of thy monastic life, O father; and while aging in the flesh, thou didst display the energy of youth in thy labors, providing all with a model of humility of mind in thy digging of the earth and thy planting of trees.

Thine apparition in the company of angels filled the humble virgin with awe and imparted healing to thy disciple; it hath moved all people to the glorification of God, and hath established them in the true Faith and repelled the assaults of heresy.

Render me fragrant with the incense of thy prayers, O all-glorious Job, dispelling the stench of my sins thereby and instilling trust in the Lord in my fœtid soul; that, purified by the grace of God, I may hymn thy mighty aid, O all-blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Theotokos, cleanse thou the sinful wounds and stripes of my soul, washing them with the springs which flow forth from the womb of thy birthgiving and cleansing them with streams therefrom. To thee do I flee, and thee do I invoke as one full of the grace of God.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, Who hath raised up a horn of salvation in the house of David His servant, wherein the Dayspring from on high hath visited us, and hath guided us into the way of peace.

With the hyssop of the grace of God sprinkle the hearts of us who bow down before thy holy relics, O venerable Job; that, sharing in thy zeal for the Faith, we may strive well to fulfill the commandments of Christ.

On earth thou didst not cease to cry aloud to God in psalms and didst preserve the vessel of thy virginity. Wherefore, in heaven thou now chantest hymns of paradise with the angels and all the saints; and from on high thou dost watch over those who labor on earth.

O how great is the incorrupt beauty of thy life! How great the wonders and healings wrought since thy death! For, lo! forsaking earthly things, thou didst truly acquire, as Christ said, heavenly blessings an hundredfold in this life, and yet more in the life to come.

O how great is the multitude of our sins, yet the strength of thy supplications surpasseth them. Deprive us not thereof, O venerable father Job, thou friend of Christ and companion of all the saints, pillar of the Church and most fervent intercessor for men’s souls.

*Theotokion:* Devoid of carnal desires, without seed thou didst conceive the Word of God Who hath created all things, O Virgin; and without corruption and maternal pangs thou gavest birth unto Him. Wherefore, confessing thee with heart and tongue to be the Theotokos, we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion, Spec. Mel: “O Light immutable…” —

Let the venerable Job be praised today as a warrior of Christ, an advocate for the people, a preacher of the Faith, a denouncer of heresy and the adornment of the Church. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

With unceasing hymns do we bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, for thou gavest birth unto One of the Trinity, and didst bear in thy divine arms the superessential, immutable and unchangeable Word.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV —

Thy struggles shone forth in the land of Galicia, O father Job; wherefore, those who loved Orthodoxy summoned thee to the land of Volhynia, and the Monastery of Dubno was adorned by thy venerable life; but the Lavra of Pochaev hath received the culmination thereof, and all those lands have been enlightened by thy teachings. *Twice*

Thy heart, full of brotherly love, O venerable one, drew to Mount Pochaev a multitude of monks, and thou becamest a zealot for their salvation. Wherefore, mindful of the saying of the Apostle, that spiritual love never faileth, to thy wondrous care we entrust our souls, which do thou lead to Christ, Who loveth mankind.

O venerable one, corruption hath not dared to touch thy dead body, which all throughout thy life thou didst mortify; and thy soul, abiding with the angels, receiveth all who have recourse unto thy love. Wherefore, lead thou our souls to Christ, Who loveth mankind.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

Our words do not suffice for the praise of thy struggles, O venerable Job. For who can recount the plenitude of thy virtues? Who can understand thy silent conversation with God? But reject not thy spiritual children who hymn thee, who entreat thine aid, are moved to compunction by thy holy life, and rejoice in thy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI.

Prokimenon —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

A Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the Galatians, § 213

\(5:22-6:2\).

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke,

§ 24 \(6:17-23\).

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

