The 3rd Day of the Month of December

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Zephaniah

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera of the prophet, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

As a divine prophet, a proclaimer and herald of the words of God, having received the radiance of the splendor of the Godhead through the purity of thy mind, thou wast shown to be the divinely inspired mouth of the Spirit. Proclaiming the things shown to thee by Him and relating to all the nations the salvation bestowed upon men and the kingdom of Christ, O most honored one, entreat Him to save and enlighten our souls.

O divinely inspired one, who art resplendent, as is meet, in the vision of God, honored with an eminent place among the prophets and with grace, and vouchsafed divine blessedness, possessed now of thy boldness toward the All-good One and compassion, cease thou never to pray in behalf of those who praise thee with faith and honor thee as one of godly eloquence, honorable and pleasing to God, that He deliver us from misfortunes and save our souls.

O Immortal One, Thou hast shown forth Thy prophet as an animate cloud, pouring forth water unto life which is truly everlasting, having sent him forth and richly bestowed upon him the all-holy Spirit, Who is consubstantial with Thee, the ­Almighty Father, and Thy Son, Who shone forth from Thine Essence, whereby he prophesied the saving advent of Christ our God and proclaimed salvation to all the nations.

And three stichera of the Theotokos, in the same tone and melody—

\[These stichera are only chanted on weekdays during the Nativity Fast, if the pastor elect to serve the services in lenten fashion, with the chanting of “Alleluia” at Matins instead of “God is the Lord.” In such a case, at Vespers the stichera of the Theotokos are chanted first on “Lord, I have cried...,” followed by the stichera of the saint.\]

As the intercessor for our whole race, O most immaculate Theotokos, from every assault of the enemy save those who piously worship thine ­Offspring; for we have all now acquired thee as a help, refuge and confirmation, and a mediatress before Christ, the Lord and Master. Him do thou entreat, we pray thee, that He grant the world peace and remission of sins unto those who have recourse to thy protection.

Behold, I lay bare for thee the sores of my soul and show thee the grievous stripes which the robbers, my wicked thoughts and the tumults of the demons, have inflicted upon me. O most immaculate Mistress, who gavest birth unto the Healer of men’s souls and bodies, grant me healing thereof, pouring forth the oil of thy loving-kindness and goodness, unto the good disposition of salvation and health.

I do not conceal my wicked deeds, for, wretch that I am, I have acquired all things which God hateth: I have defiled my flesh, spirit and mind with impious thoughts, vile deeds and words; with my tongue I condemn sinners, while I myself commit worse things, O Theotokos. Grant me correction of all these things, that, having rid myself of mine evil habits, I may fall down and weep over what I have wickedly done in the course of my life.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone and melody—

In that I have fallen into the abyss of many offenses, wretch that I am, because of my slothfulness, despondency and ignorance, I am now stuck fast in despair. Be thou my help and purification and my salvation, O all-pure one, readily granting me consolation; and I beseech thee, implore and fall down before thee, and with faith cry out to thee, that I not utterly appear to be the delight of the deceiver.

Or this Stavrotheotokion, in the same tone and melody—

Lament Me not, O Mother, beholding thy Son and God hanging upon the Tree, Who suspended the earth freely upon the waters and fashioned all creation; for I shall arise and glorify Myself, and shall break the might of the kingdom of hell, destroy its power, and deliver those who have been bound by its villainy, in that I am compassionate; and I shall lead them to my Father, in that I love mankind.

Troparion, in Tone II—

Celebrating the memory of Thy prophet Zephaniah, O Lord, through him do we entreat Thee: Save Thou our souls!

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “May the glory of Zephaniah illumine me,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

We beseech thee, O prophet, who standest before the throne of God, that thou earnestly entreat Him to grant enlightenment to us who with faith hymn thine honored memory.

Thou hast been shown to be a divine instrument containing enlightenment and the gifts of the divine Spirit, O most wise Zephaniah; wherefore, rejoicing, we, the faithful, call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* The Sun which shone forth from thy holy womb, O Mistress, illumineth all the earth with most brilliant rays; and enlightened thereby, we honor thee as the Mother of God.

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

He Who, as God, seeth all things, O blessed and right wondrous one, in godly manner manifestly revealeth and showeth to thee knowledge of the future and awareness of what is to be.

Having strengthened thy mind with the boldness of piety, O blessed one, thou didst bow thyself down to the divine Spirit and there didst receive divine inspirations.

*Theotokion:* Behold, with faith all generations call thee blessed who, in manner transcending nature, gavest birth in the flesh within time unto the timeless Word, yet remained a virgin still.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “The portals of compassion...”—

Having cleansed thy mind of defilement, O most wise one, thou didst make it a divine mirror reflecting the rays of the Spirit of God; and now, rejoicing, hast departed unto the Source of effulgence, O Prophet Zephaniah.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Groaning from my heart and inmost parts do I offer thee, O all-immaculate one, asking thine aid, which is accompanied by good. Have mercy upon my greatly suffering soul. Move thou the most merciful God to pity, that He deliver me from damnation and the lake of fire, O thou who alone art blessed.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The ever-virgin Maiden who gave birth unto Thee, O Christ, beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross for our sake, was wounded heart and soul by the sword of grief, and wept, lamenting maternally. By her supplications have mercy upon us, O Merciful One.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

The Lord of all appeared to us in accordance with thy prophecy, O blessed one, calling all to knowledge of Him; and He hath freed us from slavery.

Illumined by grace, thou didst make proclamation, speaking to those who bow low to labor beneath the one yoke, who follow the Faith and serve the Lord.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Mary, still thou the tumult of the passions of my mind and the storm of temptations, as thou gavest birth unto the Wellspring of dispassion, O Virgin Mother.

Ode V

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

By thine entreaties, O blessed and glorious prophet, convert me from unrighteousness to virtue, and lead me from the captivity of the passions to the light of piety.

Having enlightened thy soul with the comeliness of the virtues, thou didst show it forth as pleasing to the splendors of the divine Spirit, by Whom thou hast been enriched by the grace of prophecy.

*Theotokion:* In many forms the words of the prophets proclaim thy birthgiving, O all-pure one; and we, beholding now their fulfillment, truly declare thee to be the Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Receiving the rays of the Spirit through revelation, O glorious one, like a mirror thou didst shine splendors of divine prophecy upon the world, prophesying the things of the future as though they were present.

The King hath come! Rejoice and adorn thyself, O Sion, beholding Him! He hath enlightened the world with the brilliant rays of His divinity and hath put the falsehood of the demons to shame!

*Theotokion:* In thy womb the Only-begotten of the Father united Himself to flesh of clay; He Who is One Person in two natures issued forth from thee without corruption, preserving thy pure virginity intact, O most lauded one.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared...”—

Thou wast shown to be brilliant by the divine Spirit, O prophet Zephaniah, proclaiming the coming of God: Rejoice exceedingly, O daughter of Sion! Proclaim Him, O Jerusalem! Behold, thy King cometh to save mankind!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thy memory hath shone upon the world like the sun, illumining with the grace of thy prophecy those who with faith chant together: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Shown forth as a cloud heavy laden with rain, thou didst let fall upon us a shower of divine knowledge from the springs of salvation, O blessed one, whereby we are enlightened to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Desiring in His divine will to restore man, the Word, Who of old gave all things existence, made His abode within thy womb, O pure and blessed one, who gavest birth unto God in the flesh.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Offered wholly to the Almighty, thou wast instructed in the mysteries by way of foreknowledge, teaching the gentiles in accordance with God’s providence. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O divinely eloquent prophet.

Offer up a hymn of supplication in behalf of those who hymn thee, O divinely blessed one, and put an end to the turmoil of temptations, that we may hymn thee, O divinely eloquent prophet.

*Theotokion:* Giving birth to God, the Lord and Bestower of life, O all-pure one, thou didst abolish the unrestrained tyranny of death, slaying it. Wherefore, we hymn thee for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Thou madest thine abode in the land of the meek, where, since thy repose, thou beholdest the splendors of the angels, O most wise Zephaniah, prophet of God, shining with grace in that thou art meek. Wherefore, rejoicing, we, the faithful, call thee blessed.

Radiantly beholding the fulfillment of thy prophecies, O all-glorious one, we marvel at the grace given thee and the purity of thy mind, and we are struck with wonder by thy soul, O godly one.

*Theotokion:* No other like thee hath ever been given us from generations of old, O most immaculate Mother of God; for thou, alone of all, hast incomparable sanctity and purity. Wherefore, thou didst receive within thyself the incarnate God.

