Also On The 15th Day Of The Month Of December

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Tryphon Of Pechenga

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O blessed Tryphon, favorite of Christ our God, who by love ever turnest our lowly souls to the Lord, quench thou the fire of our passions with thy venerable supplications, leading us to the fulfillment of the precepts of God, and cleanse our hearts by true repentance, for we call upon thee for help as a father. *Twice*

O venerable Tryphon, full of wisdom divine, thy pure soul, shining with reason, hath been illumined by God, and, emitting the splendors of the virtues, filleth with light the fullness of the faithful, dispelling the darkness of the demons. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Possessed of a merciful soul, a pure mind and a vigilant heart, immaculate faith and love truly unfeigned, thou hast been translated from earth to the heavens, O Tryphon our venerable father, and thou dwellest with the choirs of preachers and the lovers of the wilderness; wherefore, we honor thee with sacred hymns and glorify thee with piety.

Glory…, in Tone I—

O Tryphon our venerable father, we marvel at thy blameless life, and we praise thee, O peer of the angels; we honor the chastity of thy mind, we hymn the humility and serenity of thy might, and we bless thee who art abundant in mercy and wondrous in all the virtues. For because of thy sacred struggles, thou delightest in the ineffable joy of Christ our God in His heavenly kingdom.

Now & ever… Theotokion—

Accepting the entreaties of sinners, and heeding the sighs of those who sorrow, O loving Mother, beseech Christ our God, the Son to Whom thou gavest birth, that our souls be saved.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Thou wast the abode and dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, O Tryphon our father all-wise; ­wherefore, we cry aloud: Cause thy servants to share in the kingdom of God, for we honor thy holy memory with love.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Like the sun, O venerable one, thy life shone forth in the lands of the north, emitting miracles; wherefore, illumine us also with never-waning light, for we ever hymn thy memory.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

O venerable father, fail not in thy supplications for thy monastery and thy faithful servants, which thou didst beget by thy spiritual evangelism, that in gladness we may all honor thy venerable festival.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

O brethren, let us all honor Tryphon our venerable father, the earthly angel and heavenly man, the wellspring of compunction, the fountain of mercy, the stream of healings, the divine and fruitful olive-tree in the desert; and let us fall down before him, saying: O venerable father, enlighten us with the oil of thy labors in the wilderness, for we praise and honor thy holy memory with faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Deliver us from tribulations, O Virgin Theotokos, Mother of Christ God, that we may all cry unto thee: Rejoice, O thou who alone art the cause of the salvation of our souls!

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

Thou wast a teacher and guide to the path which leadeth to life; for thou wast first to arrive in part of the Norwegian land and didst illumine the heathen at the uttermost ends of the lands of the north, giving birth to them in water and the Holy Spirit; thou didst plant thy sacred children like olive-trees in the barren wastes, and didst found the great Monastery of the Holy and Life-creating, Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity, assembling a multitude of monks. Wherefore, honoring thee as a peer of the apostles and the desert-dwellers, and earnestly falling down before thee, we cry: Entreat the God of all for the Russian land, for thy province and for all those who honor thy memory!

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, and as God revealed the resurrection: disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone VI—

Exalted to the contemplation of God through visions and spiritual feats, thou wast shown to be godly, O venerable Tryphon; and, flourishing like a palm-tree in the midst of trackless wastes, thou didst found the Monastery of the All-holy Trinity and other churches, assembling a multitude of monks. Wherefore, we, thy faithful children, lovingly honor thy memory. *Twice*

O all-wise Tryphon, perceiving the falsity of transitory things, thou didst command thy disciples to flee from the world as though it were a bitter sea of evil destruction; and, standing now before the mansions of the Most High, cease not to teach us and pray for our souls.

O Tryphon our father, who perceived nothing sweet and beautiful in the present age of this life, thou didst wander in silence amid the wilderness, the mountains and groves, looking ever to the one God; and, preserving thy heart as a pure habitation for the Holy Trinity, thou didst rid thy soul of every passion. Entreat the Holy Trinity in behalf of our souls.

And 4 stichera, in Tone VIII—

O venerable father Tryphon, thou didst make thy members servants of righteousness; in thy firm resolve didst sweetly accept not to be troubled, nor to be pained in mind, by things which quickly pass away; and thou didst ever cause thy soul to blossom through tearful prayers. Wherefore, in God thou hast received the noetic blessedness which is to come. Entreat the Lord in behalf of our souls! *Twice*

O Tryphon our venerable father, thou confessor of Christ, thou didst enlighten a heathen nation in proclaiming the glad tidings of God, and, having increased thy children in the Monastery of the Holy Trinity, thou didst feed them abundantly with the word of God more than with honey, and didst command them to seek before all else the kingdom of God and His righteousness. Wherefore, having received from God the great gift of healing, pray thou in behalf of our souls.

O venerable father Tryphon, having contended bravely against the devil in the wilderness, thou didst plant thy hut as a standard of victory in the impassable wastes, as in heaven; wherefore, thou wast a valiant warrior of Christ God. And dwelling now with the angels in light unapproachable, pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O Tryphon, thou peer of the apostles and dweller in the wilderness, we honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks. Thou didst show forth the words of the apostles, didst preach the works of Christ God to an ignorant people, and, having slain thyself with the sword of the Spirit, wast shown to be exalted in great humility of mind, a great and obedient servant to all. Wherefore, Jesus, the gladsome Light, hath exalted and glorified thee, deifying thee with miracles. Him do thou entreat in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII—

Rejoice, O our venerable father Tryphon, who hast flooded the lands of the north with the sweet waters of thy teachings, for which cause the Lord God hath bestowed a heavenly crown upon thee.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O Tryphon, peer of the apostles, for, having hated the falsehood of the demons with perfect hatred, thou didst utterly destroy the snares of evil spread out in the wilderness, for which cause Christ God hath anointed thee to partake of the joy of heaven.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Rejoice, O venerable Tryphon, confessor of the Faith, who enlightened the northernmost land and the trackless wilderness, and pleased God by his inner stillness and the torrents of his tears during prayer. Beseech the Holy Trinity in behalf of us who lovingly celebrate thy memorial.

Glory…, in Tone II—

O venerable father Tryphon, the memory of thy repose hath shone forth today like the sun; like myrrh hath it been poured forth in our hearts, perfuming our souls with its sweet fragrance. For even after thy repose thou didst amaze the tsar and the people with thy miracles. Beseech the Holy Trinity, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O new wonder greater than all the wonders of the past! For who hath ever known a mother to give birth without having known a man, and to bear on her arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? Yet it was the will of God to be born. O all-pure one, who bore Him in thine arms as an infant and hast maternal boldness before Him: cease not to pray in behalf of those who honor thee, that He have compassion and save our souls.

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

Thou wast a teacher and guide to the path which leadeth to life; for thou wast first to arrive in part of the Norwegian land and didst illumine the heathen at the uttermost ends of the lands of the north, begetting them by water and the Holy Spirit; thou didst plant thy sacred children like olive-trees in barren wastes, and didst found the great Monastery of the Holy and Life-creating, Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity, assembling a multitude of monks. Wherefore, honoring thee as a peer of the apostles and the desert-dwellers, and earnestly falling down before thee, we cry: Entreat the God of all for the Russian land, for thy province and for all those who honor thy memory! *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

With hymns let us honor our venerable and God-bearing father Tryphon, the firm adamant and tower unshaken by the assaults of the enemy; for by his patience he wounded the adverse foe in the impassable wastes and struck him mute. And now he prayeth for our souls before the throne of God. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Awesome was the wonder of the conception and ineffable the manner of the birthgiving which took place in thee, O pure Ever-virgin. They fill my mind with awe and amaze my thoughts. For thy glory hath spread forth upon all, O Theotokos, unto the salvation of our souls.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

By thy wandering through the wilderness, thy fasting and abstinence, thy lying upon sharp stones, thou didst lay waste to thy flesh; and having enriched the souls of many by faith in God, and thereby pleased God, from Him thou didst receive the great gift of healings, O venerable Tryphon. Him do thou entreat in behalf of those who with love honor thy holy and right wondrous memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

By thy divine birthgiving, O all-pure one, thou didst restore the mortal nature of men which had been corrupted by the passions, and didst raise all up from death to life incorruptible. Wherefore, as thou didst foretell we all magnify thee as is meet, O all-glorious Virgin.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Tryphon, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Thou wast shown to be wondrous in thy patience, O venerable Tryphon, who pleased Christ by thy preaching, monasticism and every good thing; for, having chosen to do good things—to wander in the wilderness for the sake of God, and to teach men the ways of salvation—reasoning manfully, thou didst say: “Even though the language of the unbelievers is harsh, yet is paradise sweet because of my preaching; onerous is my wandering and travelling through the wilderness, yet blessed will it be to receive immortality!” Wherefore, O our father, we beseech thee: Pray thou to Christ in behalf of us all, that we may be counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We magnify thee, O Theotokos, crying aloud: Thou alone art blessed, for from thee was Christ our God ineffably born. Rejoice, O all-glorious Mother of our Life!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 10 \[Mt. 4: 24-5: 12\]

At that time, there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him: and he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Clothed from on high by the divine Spirit, with boldness thou didst proclaim the name of Christ our God to the iniquitous, O venerable father Tryphon. Thou didst cut down the hordes of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, for which cause thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the mansions of heaven. And now, as thou hast boldness before the Holy Trinity, ask thou peace for our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 8 troparia, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us all chant a hymn of victory unto Him Who delivered Israel from the bitter bondage of Pharaoh, and led them dryshod in the depths of the sea, for He hath been glorified.

O ye people, let us all hymn our venerable father Tryphon, who is great in miracles, who delivered men from the bitter bondage of the devil and brought them to holy baptism; and let us render glory unto Christ God, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye people, let us all hymn our great father Tryphon as another Paul, for he followed the call of his Lord, Whom, like a precious treasure, he found in a desert cell and therewith enriched his heart. Wherefore, O venerable one, we beseech thee: Entreat the Holy Trinity, that we be granted peace and great mercy.

O brethren, let us all hymn the angelic Tryphon, who, burning with the fire of divine love, forsook his home and the love of his parents. Wherefore, as he hath boldness before the Lord, he prayeth for our souls.

*Theotokion:* O ye people, let us all hymn her who gave birth to God the Savior, and who, dispelling our great despondency and grief, granteth our souls great mercy. Wherefore, we cry out to her: O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, by thy supplications to thy Son and our God save us from misfortunes and evils.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, and illumine me with the light of Thy countenance, for there is none as holy as Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Having made thyself steadfast by faith in the Holy Trinity as with a mighty shield, O venerable one, thou didst spurn all the riches and beauties of this world, preferring, with Paul, to know nought but Christ Jesus, and Him crucified. Him do thou beseech, that He deliver us from all evils.

Having made thy thought steadfast with the knowledge of Christ God, thou didst flee thy native land like the righteous Abraham; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O our father, who didst emulate the forefathers of old!

Jesus Christ our Lord, God Almighty, Who made His first disciples steadfast upon the rock of His commandments, likewise made thee steadfast in latter times, sending thee to a remote land, that thou mightest illumine the people there with the light of the Faith. Pray thou for all who honor thy memory.

*Theotokion:* We entreat thee, the all-holy Virgin, as our confirmation in the midst of tempest and our right calm haven amid the raging waves, in that thou art loving and gavest birth to Christ, One of the Trinity: Help us, and deliver us from a lying tongue.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

In hymns, O ye faithful, let us fittingly honor the great father Tryphon, the lover of the Trinity, who manifestly taught the lands of the north the divine Faith and founded a monastery to the glory of the Holy Trinity; and let us cry: Rejoice, O preacher of the Faith!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We bless thee with unceasing hymnody, O Virgin Theotokos, for thou gavest birth to One of the Trinity, and bearest in thy blessed arms the all-rich Word, Who is immutable and unchangeable.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Great is the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Christ! For, foreseeing it with divine vision from above, Habbakuk cried out to Thee: Thou hast come for the salvation of Thy people, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Our venerable father Tryphon, beholding the great mystery of Thine appearance near his home in the wilderness, O Christ, hastened to a far-away land, and there led the people to the heavenly kingdom along the path of salvation. Thee do we beseech, O our God: Guide us with the reins of repentance to that blessed city.

O venerable Tryphon, showing forth in deed the great mystery of the commandment of God, thou didst build a temple dedicated to the Holy and Life-creating Trinity and didst assemble a multitude of disciples. Entreat the Holy Trinity, that our souls find mercy.

O venerable father, who can recount the great mystery of thy labors in the wilderness—thy hunger, thirst, the blows thou didst endure at the hands of the heathen when thou didst proclaim the Gospel, thy being cast down to the ground, and the threats of divers tortures? God alone knoweth! Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O our father Tryphon, who suffered greatly for the sake of Christ our God!

*Theotokion:* Of old, O Virgin Theotokos, thy birthgiving was prefigured by many and divers mysteries; and, beholding their fulfillment, we hasten to thee, the Mother of God, and, weeping, pray: Hide us in the mystery of thy protection!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Illumine our minds with the light of Thy commandments and with the splendor of Thy grace, O God, granting us Thy mercy, for Thy precepts are light and peace, O Good One.

Illumining thy mind with the law of God, O venerable father Tryphon, from childhood thou didst move the Holy Trinity to mercy by thy tearful supplications; wherefore, having shone forth in great miracles, pray thou for our souls!

With the light of the preaching of the Gospel thou didst illumine a blind people; and, having come to know the Son of God, the never-waning Light, Who was preached by thee and before Whom thou now dost stand, we, thy servants, entreat thee: Pray that our souls be saved.

Illumine us with obedience to the commandments of God, O father Tryphon, guide us to the path of repentance, and vouchsafe unto us sinners, that after the departure of our souls we who honor thy holy memory may receive a place at the right hand of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O holy Virgin Mother, our enlightenment, thou art the morning-star leading Christ our God, the great Sun, to us. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Lead me up from the abyss of transgressions, I pray.

Having shown forth the foresight of the prophets in very truth, O our venerable father Tryphon, and having sweetly fed the starving with the Bread of life, entreat the good God in our behalf, that He may permit us to partake without hindrance of His most sumptuous banquet.

Thou didst emulate the Prophet Jonah, O venerable father: for through repentance he saved the great city of Nineveh from utter destruction; and gathering all the scattered into oneness of mind, thou didst teach them to believe in the Holy Trinity. Be thou ever mindful of us, thy children, in thy supplications!

To the ignorant people thou didst manifestly show forth the writings of the prophets concerning the incarnation of the Son of God. Having enriched them as with a precious treasure, pray thou to the Holy Trinity in behalf of our souls.

*Theotokion:* From afar the holy prophets foretold thy birthgiving, O holy Mother; for without knowing man thou gavest birth to the Son of God, One of the Trinity, and didst remain a virgin even after giving birth. Beseech Him, that He have mercy on our souls.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

Giving wings to all the desire of thy mind, that it might soar aloft unto God, without wavering thou didst follow His call with all thy soul; and making thine abode in the uttermost wilderness, and living there an angelic and apostolic life, thou becamest for many a path to salvation, for which cause Christ glorified and enriched thee with the gift of miracles. Wherefore, we all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Tryphon our father, thou unshakable confirmation of thy land!

*Ikos:* Thou wast given to a newly-enlightened land as a branch of holiness, a stock of primacy, an ever-blossoming flower of the wilderness, a God-given fruit; wherefore, we who honor thy memory cry aloud unto thee: Rejoice, O venerable one who studied goodness from thy youth; rejoice, thou who wast vigilant in all things with a good conscience! Rejoice, O most lauded one, thou branch of Christ; rejoice, thou who didst keep well the commandments of God! Rejoice, thou who didst shine forth like the sun, from the west to the north; rejoice, thou who, seeing the Lapps languishing in demonic idolatry, didst bitterly groan for their conversion when thou didst pray to God! Rejoice, O ever-memorable wonder-worker Tryphon, our father!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the people were summoned with the sound of music to worship the image, the children of David, chanting the songs of Sion like their fathers, rejected the wicked edict of the tyrant and transformed the flame into dew, singing the hymn: O supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst teach the ignorant to venerate the image of the Holy Trinity, and didst overthrow the altars of the demons, O Tryphon our venerable father. And, instructed by thee, we sinners praise the Holy Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O thou who didst provide thy disciples with an example of humility, silence and obedience, and who, like a mirror, didst show forth in thyself the image of every particular virtue, be thou mindful of us who praise and hymn the one God in Trinity, Who is blessed forever.

Thou didst firmly admonish thy disciples to venerate the image of Christ and His divine Mother, and of all the saints, and didst command them to avoid and spurn the ungodliness of the Lutherans and Calvinists; and by thy supplications to this day thy disciples reject their heresies, praising and hymning our blessed God forever.

*Theotokion:* Falling down before thine image, O all-holy Virgin Mistress, we pray: O Mother who gavest birth to God, preserve us all from the assault of the enemy and from the slander of a sharp tongue, for we cry aloud to thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Hymn the Lord, Who preserved the children in the burning fiery furnace and descended unto them in the guise of an angel, and exalt Him supremely forever!

In the midst of the fiery flame the Son and Word of God saved the children; and thee also did the Almighty preserve, when thou didst find thyself in the midst of the raging idolaters, as in a furnace, and, unshaken, didst cry aloud: Know ye, bless and hymn the all-hymned God, and exalt Him supremely forever!

As the Chaldæans of old were consumed by the flame of the furnace, so were the demons driven away by the preaching which issued forth from thy mouth like the radiance of fire; but the people were enlightened thereby. Wherefore, moved by thee, were thy disciples wont to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Many burned in the flame of ungodliness through their ignorance of God; but thou, O our venerable father, didst quench the fire of demonic idolatry with the water of thy tears and streams of thy pious teachings, and, having cooled their burning souls, thou didst teach them to chant: O God of our fathers, all-hymned and supremely exalted art Thou forever!

*Theotokion:* When the great Moses beheld thee in the bush and the flames of the fire, O holy Mother of God, he perceived a prefiguration of thine incorrupt birthgiving. O all-pure Virgin, from evils deliver us who honor thee, and who entreat and praise thy Son and our God, Who is all-hymned and supremely exalted for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thee, the Mother of God, the radiant lamp, the all-wondrous glory more exalted than all creatures, do we magnify with hymns.

We honor thee as a radiant lamp shining on high with the light of preaching and with many miracles, O venerable father Tryphon. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat the Holy Trinity in behalf of thy land and all the people, that our souls may find mercy.

John, the great Tsar, beholding thee as a radiant lamp in the royal city, marvelled at thine honorable countenance and came to love thee greatly. And we, thy servants, pray with faith and love to thee, the healer of our souls and bodies: Entreat the merciful God, that He grant us remission of sins and great mercy!

Jesus Whom thou didst preach, taking thee as a radiant lamp from the ends of the earth after thy repose, set thee before the Tsar as a beacon; and by thine appearance, O our venerable father, thou didst save the great Tsar Theodore. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Tryphon our father, thou speedy helper!

*Theotokion:* We entreat thee, the radiant lamp and Mother of God, who art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare than the seraphim: Ever save us all, O Mother who art kind of heart!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “O instructor in wisdom…”—

Having delighted in abstinence and restrained the desires of the flesh, O divinely wise one, like a star of surpassing radiance thou didst illumine the people of Lapland with the beams of thy miracles; and we now entreat thee: Preserve thy servants from the assault of the deceiver.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We who are crucified together with Christ Who issued forth from thee, O all-pure one, set our hope on thee after God. Preserve us utterly unharmed beneath thy protection through thine entreaties to Him.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV—

Seeing the riches of thy soul, O venerable father, the greatly crafty one tried to steal back his own disciples, for they beat thee for speaking the truth; yet the wicked one was unable to rob thee of thy spiritual treasure, for he found thine immaculate soul fully armed. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Let not him who seeketh to devour us take us captive and strip us naked, O venerable one, but go thou before us and deliver us from the assault of the deceiver.

Egypt boasteth in Anthony the Great, Palestine honoreth Sabbas the Sanctified, the great city of Kiev hymneth the wise Anthony, the first to found monasteries in Russia, and Great Russia doth glorify with honor the venerable Sergius who hath poured forth so many miracles; and the monks of thy monastery and the people of thy province, O father Tryphon, lovingly bless thine evangelical labors and thy toils in the wilderness. Entreat Christ God for the salvation of our souls.

O our venerable father Tryphon, by thy supplications thou didst make steadfast the parts of the north and thy city, and by thy confession of the Trinity thou didst destroy the falsehood of polytheism; wherefore, thou hast received divine grace to wash away all the passions of the faithful. O holy Tryphon, entreat the one God in Trinity in behalf of our souls.

O our venerable father, having purified thy mind with dispassion, thou didst attain unto thine uttermost desire, the contemplation of God; for the wild beasts were obedient unto thee, as the lion once obeyed the venerable Gerasimus by the Jordan, and they refrained from causing any harm in the parts of the wilderness under thine authority. And we now beseech thee: Deliver us from the pursuit of the soul-destroying beast, and entreat the Holy Trinity for the salvation of our souls!

Glory…, in Tone III—

Thou didst have true and sincere trust in the Holy Trinity, didst teach goodly spiritual submission to all, and didst show thyself to be a true guide to humility of mind; and, as Joseph was to Egypt, thou didst show thyself to be one who most wisely took thought for those who destroyed thy monastery. O Tryphon our father, entreat Christ God in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; and glorifying thee, we chant: Rejoice, O all-holy Virgin!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the venerable one.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213 \[5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\].

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

