The 15th Day Of The Month Of December

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Eleutherius

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Paul Of Mount Latros

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Tryphon of Pechenga, and as well that in honor of St. Stephen of Sougdaia\)

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Thou becamest a most sacred vessel of the divine Spirit, having cleansed thy soul of the passions, O most sacred one. Hence, thou didst receive the holy and divine anointing, becoming a hierarch, a divinely wise leader of the people, and an invincible martyr of Him Who endured sufferings for our sake and hath poured forth dispassion, O athlete Eleutherius.

Seeing thee finishing well the contest, she who gave thee birth desired to run the same race as thee; and, embracing thee in the midst of the arena, O wise one, she was slain like a heifer. With her we entreat thee, O all-blessed Eleutherius: Beseech the Lord and Savior in our behalf.

Thou didst prevail over thy body, which was wounded by blows and brought into contact with fire; for thou didst furnish thy mind with wings through invincible desire and the most comely beauty of the Divine One Who loveth us, by Whose sweet desire thou wast wounded, O adornment of martyrs, ornament of hierarchs, converser with angels, O athlete Eleutherius.

And 3 stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

O Paul, adornment of monastics, beauteous scion of the wilderness, boast of the venerable, pride of Mount Latros, confirmation of the faithful: By thy supplications to the Master deliver from every evil circumstance and condemnation to the fire those who with love celebrate thy most honored memory and kiss the shrine of thy relics.

Having made thyself a temple of the Trinity, O divinely blessed father, thou didst erect a temple dedicated to the Trinity; and having entered the trackless wilderness of Mount Latros, as Moses did Mount Sinai, thou didst make thine abode thereon, where, receiving the divine law, thou didst truly instruct multitudes of monastics, O most wondrous one, with great excellence.

As thou hast boldness before God, pray thou, O venerable one, that the flock which thou didst gather together with great effort be preserved from the temptations of the enemy and the assaults of the heathen, from fire and sword and every attack of the evil one; for, having thee as our guardian and protection, O blessed one, we have acquired thee as our hope with God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, In the same melody:

O all-holy Bride of God, in thy womb thou didst bear the only infinite God Who in His goodness became man without becoming finite. Wherefore, I beseech thee: Rescue me from the passions which oppress me, that, treading the straight and narrow path, I may attain unto that which leadeth to life, O Virgin.

Stavrotheotokion—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb of His own will led forth as a man to the slaughter, she said, weeping: “Dost Thou now hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? What is this that Thou hast wrought, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine exceeding goodness which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Eleutherius. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…: Troparion of the venerable one, in the same tone—

O most glorious Paul, we hymn thee as one who dwelleth together with the incorporeal hosts and as a companion of all the venerable, and we beseech thee: Pray thou ever for us, that we may find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two of the saints.

Ode I

Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Show me to be free of the passions, O most blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

By thy radiant supplications, O martyr Eleutherius, free me, who am held in thrall by the darkness of the passions, that I may hymn thee, the servant of Christ, with hymns divine.

Thou didst shine forth with the most pure rays of suffering, O most sacred one, with thy blood didst dye thy priestly raiment, and thou becamest radiant through the Spirit.

Cleaving unto God from thy youth with a most pure mind, thou didst drive carnal mindedness away from thy soul and wast enriched with the abundant grace of miracles.

*Theotokion:* Like a throne of fire thou bearest the Creator, and like an animate bridal-chamber and a beautiful palace thou containest the King Who hath become as we are, apart from change and confusion.

Canon of the venerable one, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

New hymnody of praise do I hasten to bring to mine open lips, O God-bearing Paul. By thy prayers grant me the grace to give utterance, O venerable one, that I may recount thine honored struggles.

Taking up the yoke of the Lord from thy youth, O venerable one, and sowing the wheat of the Spirit in the furrows of thy heart, thou didst reap the grain which maketh steadfast men’s souls, O divinely blessed one.

Through manifold efforts thou didst receive the kingdom on high, having lived on earth like an incorporeal being and passed through life like an angel in thy body. And now, standing in the highest before the Trinity, do thou be mindful of us.

*Theotokion:* The Incorporeal and All-blessed One, receiving my corruptible flesh from thy body, and lying in the manger of His own will, O Bride of God, deifieth that which He received by uniting Himself with it.

Ode III

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

O wise one who didst will to suffer for Christ, thou didst endure the wounding of thy body, finding delight in thy pangs and afflictions; wherefore, thou hast now received a life without pain.

Holding fast with the fervent desire for the Creator, O divinely wise athlete Eleutherius, bedewed by the fire of the Spirit thou didst submit thyself to fiery testing.

Shown forth as most sacred among priests and a martyr most steadfast among the martyrs, O blessed one, thou hast received a twofold crown, continually beholding the face of God.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst bud forth the Staff of strength whereby we are made steadfast; for the staff of Aaron, which once put forth branches, prefigured thee, O land untouched by the plough, O pure turtle-dove, O Ever-virgin!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* To Christ God, the Son Who was begotten of the Father without corruption before time began, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

O thy courage! O the valor of thy soul, O glorious one! For, desiring to break the jaws of the invisible lions, at night thou didst carry two large stones as a weight upon thy shoulders.

Who can fittingly recount thy struggles? For, treading the hard paths in the wilderness, thou didst eat wild plants, learning to sweeten thy meals with the pangs of asceticism.

Moses the God-seer of old was vouchsafed a divine vision in the bush, and the most honored Paul manifestly recognized himself as the fire which appeared from on high, burning without being consumed.

*Theotokion:* O Word, Who as God in essence art without beginning and art equally worshipped with the Father: in being born of the Virgin Thou received a beginning in time, manifesting Thyself as man by nature; and becoming a babe, O Christ, Thou didst reveal Thyself as an infant wrapped in swaddling bands.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

From thy youth, O wise one, thou didst manfully desire that which passeth understanding and didst forsake the tumult of the world. For thy divine way of life thou becamest a dwelling-place of the Trinity, and hast illumined those who have recourse to thee with faith. Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O Paul who art most rich!

Sessional hymn of the hieromartyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Having acquired a mind free of the passions, thou wast a most dutiful servant of God, and didst free from falsehood those who hearkened well unto thee; and having suffered as priest and martyr, O Eleutherius, thou hast received a twofold crown. Pray thou, that we be saved.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Steered by the power of the Almighty, and borne along by the mast and sail of the Cross, thou didst pass easily through the storm of life and hast reached the truly divine havens; and having acquired a heavy cargo of the virtues, thou didst bring it to the Master of all, and didst hear from Him: Well done, O good servant. Wherefore, O blessed Paul, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having fallen into the temptations of great cunning laid for me by enemies visible and invisible, caught in the tempest of my countless offenses, I make haste to the haven of thy goodness, O pure one, as to my fervent assistance and protection. Wherefore, O all-pure one, pray thou earnestly to Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly entreat thee, O all-pure one, ever beseeching Him to grant remission of sins unto those who hymn thy glory as is meet.

Stavrotheotokion—

The Virgin and Mother of the Redeemer, standing before the Cross and lamenting with tears of anguish, cried out maternally: What strange and most glorious thing is this that I behold, O my Son? Thou Who pourest forth dispassion upon all men art crucified upon a Cross between two condemned thieves, Thy side pierced, and Thou art given gall to drink by hands which Thou Thyself hast made! But arise and grant remission of sins unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith.

Ode IV

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Neither the gaping mouths of the lions, nor the raging of the fire, nor cruel threats were able to weaken the endurance of thy strength, O initiate of the sacred mysteries; but, hard as adamant, thou didst delight in tortures, afire with zeal divine.

Full of life-bearing waters, thy mouth poured forth rivers of divine doctrines, O hieromartyr, drowning the mockery of the iniquitous and watering the hearts of those who acknowledge Christ as God.

Glorifying thee greatly, thy Creator, for Whom thou wast zealous to suffer, O athlete, sent a dove bearing angelic food to thee who becamest angelic through the most radiant splendors of suffering.

*Theotokion:* The angelic armies were in awe, beholding how He Who is invisible became visible, through thee assuming a guise like unto ours, O Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou beseech, that He vouchsafe salvation unto all who glorify thee with faith.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Once, in the time of thy youth, when thou wast overcome by sleep and didst weaken while standing all night, thine honored teacher Peter, seeing this, smote thee in the face; but, having smote thee, he straightway comforted thee.

Conversing privily with God, having drawn nigh to Him directly, our father Paul was never overcome by sleep after the blow dealt him by his teacher; and becoming like unto the incorporeal ones, he ever remained vigilant.

Shown forth as a most sacred vessel, thou didst receive the heavenly myrrh of Christ in thy heart; and, having brightly lighted the lamp of thy patient abstinence with a virtuous life, thou didst hasten to the divine Bridegroom.

*Theotokion:* O Word Who hast heaven for Thy throne and the earth for Thy footstool, becoming incarnate Thou didst enter the womb of the Virgin and madest Thine abode in a wretched cave; yet as King and God-man Thou didst receive gifts from the magi, the kings of Persia.

Ode V

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, for we know none other than Thee. We call upon Thy name, for Thou art the God of the living and the dead.

The most wicked enemy, plotting to lead thee astray through deceitful words, O martyr, is shown to be put to scorn, the most crafty sage of malice being outwitted by thy wisdom.

Mounting the chariot of the divine virtues, O glorious one, thou didst reach the summit of martyrdom and didst cast down the vaunted pride of the wicked demons.

Desiring to behold the beauty of Jesus, O venerable one, thou didst adorn thyself with the beauty of martyrdom, and didst go to Him, crowned with a wreath of splendor.

*Theotokion:* Every mind marvelleth at the wonder of thee, O pure one; for thou gavest birth to God in the flesh and feddest the Nurturer with milk, without having experienced the temptation of man, as thou thyself knowest.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Having cleansed thy mind of the mire of the passions, thou becamest an unblemished mirror, ever receiving the radiance of the Spirit. Wherefore, vanquished, the tempter who taught our ancestors the weakness of evil in the garden was put to shame by thee.

Having acquired Christ God, Who is Wisdom, abiding in thy heart, thou didst trample beneath thy beautiful feet the foolish sage of evil who attempted to deceive thee with divers proposals, O divinely wise Paul.

As a receptacle of the Light, a son of the Day, as though he were a lion thou didst deceive the prince of darkness who assailed thee with earthquakes and a rain of stones, sought to terrify thee with his arrogance and set upon thee, raging, O Paul.

*Theotokion:* Incarnate of thee, O Ever-virgin Maiden Bride of God, the all-unoriginate Word, Who through thee lowered Himself to lie as a babe in a manger of dumb beasts, hath delivered from irrationality our race, that of the first Adam who was driven from Eden.

Ode VI

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

The excellent sheep of the flocks of Christ, the most eloquent pastor, the path of struggles, is glorified, having glorified God with his members.

Given life through visions of God, thou didst steadfastly render lifeless the greatly crafty foe, O ever-memorable wise one, glory of the martyrs and standard of the priesthood.

Enduring wounds, entering the fire of thine own will, thou didst halt the onslaughts of the savage beasts, possessing constant love for the Creator.

*Theotokion:* Revealed as a tabernacle of sanctity, O Mary, sanctify my wretched soul, which hath been defiled by the pleasures, and make it a receptacle of glory divine.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

As the Savior, Christ our God fed a vast multitude with a few loaves of bread, so did Paul, the initiate of Christ’s mysteries, with the little water contained in a tiny cruse gladden a multitude, filling them to repletion with its abundance.

By thy supplications, O wondrous one, thou causest burning heat to cease and liftest dire famine; and with waters poured forth from on high thou dost irrigate the earth and givest drink to its dry furrows, causing it to put forth richly, and multiplying the crops thereof.

Amid thy pangs thou didst receive the life which is devoid of pain, and thou causest the affliction of cruel pangs to cease for those who with faith ask to receive healing from thee, O most honored one, thou adornment of the fathers. Wherefore, loose thou the pangs of my body and soul, I pray.

*Theotokion:* The Word of the Father, the timeless Son of God, the preëternal Offspring of the pure and divine Maiden and Mother, Who as man is become a babe and as God is uncontainable, is contained by the cave. Wherefore, marvelling, we all worship the great mystery.

Kontakion of the hieromartyr, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

We all praise thee as the adornment of priests and the proclamation of passion-bearers, O venerable hieromartyr Eleutherius, and we entreat thee: From all manner of misfortunes free those who celebrate thy memory with love, praying unceasingly for us all.

*Ikos:* As Thou alone art the compassionate God Who loveth mankind, O loving Bestower of life, look Thou upon the darkness of my soul, and with Thine omnipotent right hand free me from the oppression of the passions, O Word, that I may hymn Thy hierarch Eleutherius; for, truly acknowledging Thee from his mother’s womb, he became sanctified, and like Samuel was offered by his sacred mother to Thee, the Creator, unceasingly praying for us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Shattered, O wise one, thou didst cry out: “May Christ now be magnified in my flesh! I fear neither the boiling of the cauldron, nor am I daunted by death or the assaults of wild beasts, for the sake of life!”

“Seeking the beauty of the one God, I desire to receive His glory alone! Let my whole body be broken and burned!” thou didst cry out, O glorious one; “I seek the freedom which enslaveth me to Christ!”

Looking toward the life to come, O blessed one, thou didst truly die to the world, and, burned with the wounds of torture, thou didst shine forth like gold and hast been laid up in the treasuries of the mansions of heaven.

*Theotokion:* The most pure Word of God, Who was born of thy womb, found thee alone to be most pure, O most immaculate Bride of God, and purifieth the faithful of the defilements which have come upon us through our failure to restrain the passions.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The children raised together in piety, disdaining the ungodly command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Shining forth like the sun, thou didst straightway illumine the East, and ascending thy pillar, standing as in the midst of the heavens, thou hast gladdened the whole world with thy teachings, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst withdraw, fleeing the billows of the world, and, making thine abode in the wilderness, as saith the Psalm, O divinely blessed one, thou didst receive God in thy heart, Who preserved thee with angelic protection.

With spiritual eyes thou didst behold the tortures of the next world, and pained in heart by thy loving soul, thou didst ever water thyself with tears, not like David, who only drenched his couch with tears at night.

*Theotokion:* The Incorporeal One is become incarnate, the Timeless One cometh under time, The Lord Who wrappeth the earth in mist is wrapped in swaddling bands for our sake, Himself appearing, past understanding, unchanged through her who knew not man.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Blossoming, thou didst put forth a garden beauteous in the splendors of martyrdom, O adornment of the martyrs. Ye have now shown yourselves to be flowers of paradise, in godly manner emitting a divine fragrance.

Thy mother mingleth her own blood with the outpouring of the blood of thee who wast born of her; for, embracing thy body, O wise one, she was slain by the sword and liveth forevermore.

Thy shrine poureth forth the waters of healings and rivers of miracles upon those in need, who wash away the defilements of soul-destroying passions, O martyred hierarch, forever.

*Theotokion:* Like rain did Christ, the sole Benefactor, descend upon thy womb, O Virgin, and truly water all creation, drying up the turbid rivers of the madness of idolatry.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With David thou didst chant a melodious hymn, well-tuned on all strings, saying: “O King of all, Thy consolations have divinely gladdened my soul by Thy loving gesture!” Wherefore, rejoicing, thou didst cry out: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Granting thee that which is contrary to carnal love and preserving thee from thy youth with His right hand, the Creator thrice divinely fed thee with greens who from childhood hadst trampled down every lust; and by the hand of an angel He gave such to thee who, loving the life of the angels, hast been glorified, O God-bearing Paul.

The three men, bound and condemned, were able to escape execution as deserters from general service, invisibly freed from their bonds by thy name, O most glorious father; for thou didst deliver those in fetters from misfortunes, and they were borne away by the hand alone of Him Who holdeth all things.

*Theotokion:* She who gave birth to the Sun of righteousness by a star summoneth the magi with gold, myrrh and frankincense, who worship Him Who hath newly become a babe immutably. Him did the shepherds magnify and the multitude of angels hymn, glorifying Him as God in essence and man by nature.

Ode IX

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, let us magnify the Theotokos, the ever-flowing, life-receiving wellspring, the light-bearing lamp of grace, the animate temple, the all-pure tabernacle which is more spacious than heaven and earth.

As the mouth of God, rescuing vain-minded people from the mouth of the alien, thou didst show them to be heirs of grace; and suffering mightily, thou livest with priests and passion-bearers, O Eleutherius.

Let Eleutherius be faithfully praised: the pure phial of the Spirit, the beautiful abode of the virtues, the innocent lamb, the ever-burning lamp, the foundation of hierarchs and martyrs.

Truly thou dost live in never-waning light, having become the most radiant light of the Sun; wherefore, by thy supplications to God, O Eleutherius, deliver from the darkness of the passions those who celebrate thy radiant memory today.

*Theotokion:* Spare us who hymn Thee, O Lord, Thou ineffable Offspring of the Virgin, in that Thou alone art our Benefactor Who lovest mankind, delivering Thy servants from perils, passions and tribulations.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, Whom praising, we magnify.

Thy boldness crieth out to God, and thou hast wrought wondrous works even after thy departure unto Him; for thou hast freed many from divers infirmities by the oil of thine effulgence.

Possessed of a most radiant soul, O venerable one, and wholly anointed as with the ointment of grace, by oil thou dispellest demons, cleansing lepers and those addled in mind, and causing cruel scabs to fall away.

Stumbling, Satan the most wicked falleth headlong like a most savage wild beast, beholding thee stretching forth the oil of thy lamp like myrrh for the healing of divers ailments; and, seized with fear, he hath vanished.

*Theotokion:* In latter times, O Mother who knewest not man, thou didst conceive in thy womb the Son Whom the Father begat incorruptibly before time. Him do the heavens show forth by the star and the earth by a cave in the ground.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; Glory…: Exapostilarion of the venerable one: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples let us ascend…”—

As David saith, thou didst flourish in the house of the Lord like a palm-tree, O venerable father, now multiplying the fruits of thy labors a hundredfold. Wherefore, drowning the hordes of the demons in the showers of thy tears, O blessed Paul, thou hast received honor from Christ and the crown of victory, O all-wise one, and the grace of miracles abundant in richness.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

He Who on high is glorified as God by the angels, O pure one, ineffably dwelt with those below without leaving the bosom of the Father; and thou wast the cause of His salvation, inexpressibly lending flesh to Him of thy pure blood, O pure one. Him do thou beseech, that He grant deliverance from transgressions to thy servants.

