Also on The 16th Day of the Month of December

Commemoration of the Holy and Blessed Empress Theophania

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone I—

Behold, a new intercessor hath now appeared to us at the throne of the Almighty, for today a holy empress is received with honor into the kingdom of heaven and is crowned with a crown of unfading glory; and we earnestly cry out to her: O blessed Theophania, partaker of eternal life and never-ending joy, in thy prayers forget not us sinners that with love honor thy holy memory.

The choirs of saints in heaven join chorus today, meeting the blessed Theophania; the venerable and the fasters greet her with a holy kiss—as one that struggled honorably; the martyrs—as one that suffered innocently; the merciful—as one who emulated our merciful God; the righteous—as one who cherished the righteousness of the Lord; and we that are born on earth make haste to the temple of God, that there we may radiantly celebrate, hymning the memory of the holy empress, and through her supplications asking Christ God to grant us great mercy.

Blessed art thou, O Theophania most wise, for loving spiritual poverty and spurning the earthly glories of kings, thou didst inherit the kingdom of heaven. Blessed art thou, for with tears didst thou water thy bed; wherefore, be thou now comforted. Blessed art thou who didst hunger for the righteousness of God, for thou hast been nourished with the Bread of Life. Blessed art thou, meek and merciful dove, for our God, the King of all, hath had mercy upon thee, lovingly opening to thee His fatherly embrace, and summoning thee to His radiant bridal chamber.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Come ye all, let us hymn the blessed Theophania, the empress of the Imperial City and handmaid of Christ, for disdaining transient glory and honor, counting all things visible and corruptible as naught, and dwelling in kingly palaces as in the desert, emulating the venerable in ascetic endeavor, she was robed in humility as in the purple; wherefore, she is glorified by all the choirs of heaven, as on earth she glorified God; for truly, O holy Theophania, thy life was in accordance with thy name. For which cause, falling down before thee, we pray: Incline to us the love of God for mankind, and reveal to us His great mercy.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious ­wonder...”—

Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, O Master Jesus, Thy Virgin Mother cried aloud: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost unjustly endure wounds, O Physician Who hast healed the infirmity of men and delivered all from corruption in Thy loving-kindness?”

At the Aposticha, Glory..., in Tone IV—

More lustrous than gold in thy many and varied virtues, adorned yet more greatly with tear drops than with pearls, O blessed Theophania, twice crowned—on earth and in heaven—invested on earth with fine linen and in heaven with a robe of light, an earthly empress who inherited the kingdom of heaven, participant in the choirs of angels and saints: Forsake not us sinners in thy care.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

When the ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, she marvelled and cried out: “What is this new sight, O my Son most desired? How hath the unbelieving and iniquitous assembly rewarded Thee, who benefited by Thy many miracles? Glory to Thine ineffable condescension, O Master!”

Troparion, in Tone I—

Hymning the divinely revealed empress, and praising her venerable life, and blessing her patience and humility, we unceasingly cry out with love: O blessed Theophania, remember us in thine ever-vigilant prayers to Christ.

At Matins

Ode I

Canon I for the blessed empress, the acrostic whereof is: “We hymn the wise empress Theophania,” in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

Let us fittingly hymn Theophania, the divinely wise empress, as one truly revealed by God and a participant in the heavenly kingdom, wherein, as a true handmaid of Christ, she hath entered and received her glory like a crowned queen. Wherefore, we cry to her: Rejoice, for thou hast received an imperishable crown!

Aware that there is but one thing needful, thou didst disdain the glory of this world, and unceasingly aflame in spirit, thou didst love labor and ascetic feats more than the delights of a life of vanity, and in adamantine patience didst thou abide until the end. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, for thou hast received an imperishable crown!

Ask thou remission of offenses for us, in no wise abandoning us in thy care, but accepting our entreaties, that in joy of spirit we may cry out: Rejoice, for thou hast received an imperishable crown!

*Theotokion:* With us the ranks of the bodiless ones hymn thee, O all-hymned Virgin, for in thy womb thou didst bear Him Who cannot be contained, incarnate, remaining Virgin as thou wast before giving birth, O Bride of God.

Canon II for the blessed empress, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Together let us hymn Theophania, empress of godly beauty revealed by God and divinely enlightened and who thereby revealeth God, participant in the incorrupt kingdom; and with gladness let us all cry out: Rejoice, O holy crown-bearer!

Faithfully didst thou serve the Tri-hypostatic One Who reigneth alone, O divinely wise one, placing honor in thy humility, willingly bending thy crowned head beneath the yoke of Christ, and abiding in the silence of thy lips. Wherefore, thou didst bring thy glory to the heavenly city on high, wherein thou now dost dwell.

“O Christ, King of kings, behold! I consider my glory to be but ashes, that I may see the glory which Thou didst have even before the world came to be; and that I may be vouchsafed to share therein. Accept me as one of Thy handmaids!” didst thou cry, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* A palm-tree flourishing in the courts of the Lord hast thou been shown to be, O Maiden Theotokos, who put forth for us Christ, the Tree of life, that we may partake of His Fruit of immortality and be made incorruptible, delivered from the curse of Adam, delighting once more in the sweetness of paradise.

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Fleeing the hypocrisy of the pharisee, turning away from earthly glory, and struggling in secret, thou didst look for praise from God alone, and didst attain it, and wast vouchsafed the kingdom of heaven.

Adam’s sin of arrogance struck not against thee, O blessed one, who wast protected with the humility of Christ, for thou didst love slavery to Christ more than earthly dominion. Wherefore, thou wast vouchsafed the kingdom of heaven.

None knew that the right glorious empress, clothed in purple and fine linen, concealed therewith an hair-shirt, and manfully endured stripes, readily vanquishing the passions, and crying out to the Lord: Deprive me not of the heavenly kingdom, O King of kings!

*Theotokion:* O pure one, without seed didst thou conceive the eternal Word Who came to us in the flesh and broke the might of death, and in His tender mercy granteth resurrection and eternal life to the dead.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty hath been broken by Thy might, O Christ, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power.

Emulating the Lamb of God, thou didst endure slanders, bonds, and imprisonment, unceasingly exulting before Him.

Naught from among the things of the earth, neither wealth, nor glory, nor yet power, conquered thee who wast wounded with heavenly love, O Theophania.

Thou didst hearken unto John, the beloved disciple, who saith, Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world; and thou didst keep this saying in thy heart.

*Theotokion:* Let those who confess thee not, O Theotokos, tremble, full of great fear, for thy mighty Son shall shatter them with the spirit of His lips.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VII—

Today hath dawned the most festive commemoration of the blessed empress of the Imperial City. Come, ye people, let us who love the feasts of the Church bow down before her precious relics, and venerating her holy countenance, let us cry out: O Theophania most wise, true partaker of the blessedness of paradise, pray thou who we that earnestly have recourse to thee and faithfully honor thine ascetic feats may inherit the sweetness thereof.

Now & ever....: Theotokion—

O Mistress, thy Son hath become wroth with thy sinful servants, for we have turned the Compassionate One to anger. Yet move Him to mercy, O pure one. O Mother of God, have pity, with thine entreaties implore Him Who is full of loving-­kindness, and deliver us from captivity.

Stavrotheotokion—

When she beheld Thee crucified, O Lord, the Virgin, weeping, cried out to Thee: “O my Son, I hymn Thine ineffable long-suffering and Thine extreme and divine condescension toward men!”

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Imprisoned, and abiding unceasingly in prayer, thou didst emulate the patience of Job, accepting misery and persecution. Wherefore, thou didst acquire the grace of the Spirit and, like a wise virgin, didst light thy lamp.

Youth and beauty, wealth and earthly dominion didst thou utterly despise, O Theophania, and abiding in royal palaces thou didst dwell in the desert in spirit, and didst remain keeping ceaseless vigil on the watchtower of thy heart, that with the wise virgins thou mightest enter the heavenly bridal chamber.

Pouring the oil of mercy upon every wound, thou didst make blessed merchandise in thy life and didst draw nigh to the gates of heaven, which opened unto thee with joy, and didst enter the chamber of the Bridegroom to dine on immortal fare.

*Theotokion:* The human race hath been saved by thy birthgiving, for thou didst bear for us the hypostatic Life, the Destruction of death, Who maketh ascent unto life, O all-immaculate Lady Theotokos.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Mystically foreseeing the ineffable mystery of Thy becoming man, O Christ God, Habbakuk cried aloud: I have heard report of Thee and was afraid; I have understood Thy works, and I glorify Thy power!

The emperor, thy spouse, knew thee to be a saint, perceiving thy struggles and unblemished life, and after thy repose he was inflamed with the desire to raise up a temple unto thee. Yet, constrained, he raised up the church of all saints, crying out: Since Theophania is a saint, let this church be in her honor!

Thou hast now reclined at the banquet of Christ, O thou who on earth wast pleased willingly to recline on a bed of sticks, that in no wise gavest rest to thy flesh. Wherefore, thou hast found divine repose, and thy brow, which on earth was crowned, hath likewise been crowned in heaven with a never-fading wreath.

Christ, the Judge of the contest, hath now manifestly glorified thee, who on earth, for His sake, didst struggle in secret, concealing thy hair shirt with purple and fine linen and radiantly keeping fast. Wherefore, the Imperial City doth earnestly bow down before the shrine of thy relics and thy soul doth exult in the mansions of heaven.

*Theotokion:* O who gavest flesh unto the Creator of the ages, divine adornment of creation, diadem of kings and hymn of the anointed, all-hymned Virgin: Strengthen thou the dominion of those who piously rule, that beneath their shadow we, too, may live in peace.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

Gazing unceasingly upon the Sun of righteousness with thy mind’s eye, thou wast enlightened by the radiance thereof, and didst shine with rays of virtue in thy life. Wherefore, illumine us also, O thou who entreatest the Giver of light in our behalf.

O thou reigning crown-bearer, make wise and enlighten Orthodox kings, that following thee in righteousness, and making their garments whiter than snow, they may enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, where shineth the never-waning Light.

With a rude garment didst thou clothe thyself on earth, O all-blessed one, praying unceasingly that the Lord Who robeth Himself in light as it were with a garment grant thee a garment of light and lead thee, adorned, into His bridal chamber, whence all are cast out that have not a wedding garment.

*Theotokion:* The mouths of orators cannot recount the ineffable wonder of thy birthgiving, O Bride of God, for thou hast given birth to the Ineffable One and in thine embrace doth bear Him Who in His hand upholdeth all things.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The Sun—the live Coal which was revealed beforehand to Isaiah—shone forth from the Virgin’s womb, granting the enlightenment of divine knowledge to those gone astray in darkness.

Thou didst restrain thy lips from vain speech, seasoning thy discourse with grace and proclaiming divine knowledge unto all.

Hearing of the foolish virgins that will weep outside the bridal chamber of Christ, thou didst diligently purchase the oil of mercy during thine earthly life, O wise Theophania. Wherefore, do thou now anoint us with drops thereof.

Holding fast to the right Faith, thou didst confess it in thy noble life, being a beacon brightly burning, and shedding light upon all.

*Theotokion:* If we did not proclaim thy greatness, O Theotokos, whom all creation doth unceasingly glorify, the very stones would cry out, to our shame.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

Thou didst please God, didst flee the pit of destruction, and didst ascend the mountain of the Lord, ever lifting up thine eyes unto the hills; and bowing down thy heart in humility, thou didst traverse the deep of life without mishap.

Through this life’s vale of tears didst thou tread by the royal way, O divinely wise one, and didst attain unto the city of God, wherein thou now art glorified. But look down from on high upon us who honor thee and who abide in the depth of offenses, and deliver us from defilement and lead us up to God.

All the raging of the sea of life can never break the ship of the Church. Wherefore, all that are therein come without mishap to that blessed shore, for the Ark of Faith shall not sink. Mindful of this, and ever abiding with the Ship of the Church, O most wise Theophania, thou didst sail the deep untroubled.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O blessed and pure one, for whose sake the unwaning Sun of righteousness hath shone forth upon us that are in darkness and the shadow of death, for thou hast been the Mediatress of our salvation.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Hearkening to the sound of the cries of entreaty which issue forth from a soul in pain, O Master, deliver me from my grievous sins, for Thou alone art the Cause of our salvation.

Thou didst offer up unceasing prayer to the unoriginate Trinity, both on the throne and in prison, in glory and in shame, heart aflame, not separating thyself from Christ the Savior, and fashioning of thyself a temple for Him.

Thou dost truly reveal God through thy pious life, O blessed Theophania; wherefore, grant us thine aid, O queen, that gazing upon thee we may rescue our senses from the raging sea of sin.

Knock, and it shall be opened unto you, saith the Lord. Wherefore, in thy struggles thou didst diligently knock at the gates to the Kingdom; and, lo! with joy were they opened unto thee; and thou didst enter into the bridal chamber of unwaning glory.

*Theotokion:* With love we hymn thee, O Virgin; and though compassed about by the floods of great tribulation, yet do we trust in thee, and hope to be saved from the depth of evil.

Kontakion, in Tone III—

Crowned with a royal diadem on earth, O blessed Theophania, thou didst desire a heavenly crown. Wherefore, by vigilance and fasting thou didst afflict thy flesh, concealing a hair shirt with royal purple, offering fervent prayer to God at every hour, and secretly performing ascetic feats. Wherefore, Christ God, the Judge of the contest, hath glorified thee openly, and now we all cry to thee: Rejoice, O blessed empress, for thou hast been vouchsafed the heavenly kingdom!

*Ikos:* Come, ye kings and princes, let us fittingly honor the empress who emulated the venerable ascetics by her life! Come, ye poor and wretched, let us glorify the merciful one who emulated the heavenly Father in mercy! Come, ye priests and all ye people, let us faithfully hymn our new helper, divinely revealed, and, offering this supplication unto God, let us cry out to her: Rejoice, O blessed empress, for thou hast been vouchsafed the heavenly kingdom!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

The tearful prayer of the honored Anna, thy childless mother, was heard, like that of the mother of Samuel of old, for the praised and most glorious God of our fathers comforted her with the gift of a child, thee, the divinely revealed maiden.

Following Rachel, Sarah, and Rebecca, and all the righteous women, in thy life, thou wast shown to be more glorious than them, for honored with earthly glory and set upon a throne, thou didst not exalt thyself in heart or mind. Wherefore, thou dost stand now before the throne of the King of all, and He accepteth thine entreaties, the praised and most glorious God of our fathers.

Emulating in thy progress before God those who from of old lived righteously—the angels, in purity and chastity; the venerable, in fasting and psalmody; the passion-bearers, in enduring all evils; and the Ruler of all Himself, in mercy—thou wast truly shown to be worthy to be numbered with the chosen of His saints. Wherefore, He hath crowned thee in His kingdom, He Who crowned thee on earth, the praised and most glorious God of our fathers.

*Theotokion:* The East from whence the Sun of glory hath risen art thou, O pure Lady, for through thee He Who hath made Himself manifest hath freed all from the darkness of unbelief and noisome sin. Wherefore, I cry to thee: Free me from the outer darkness!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Thou didst pass through this earthly vale as a stranger, sighing for the heavenly homeland in foreign parts; and trampling down the idol of carnality, thou didst serve and call upon the living God, Who alone is blessed and most glorious.

The divine comeliness of thy soul ever mirrored the image of the Triune Divinity, for like the sun thou didst ever shine upon both the evil and the good, and like the dew didst thou soothe souls inflamed by tribulation, urging all to bless and glorify Christ.

Tried by the fire of affliction and tribulation and purified like gold thereby, thou didst shine forth in the virtues, fervently crying out to the Creator and Savior: Receive Thou my contrite heart as an acceptable offering, O Master, Who art blessed and most glorious!

*Theotokion:* Behold the diligence of our enemies that are ever striving for our destruction, O Lady. Put thou their aspirations to shame and show forth as vain their craftily wrought snares, that through thee we may thankfully cry out to thy Son: Thou art our God, Who art blessed and most glorious!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Clothed in chastity as with purple, robed with humility as in fine linen, and adorned with the other virtues as with a royal crown, and bedewed with the grace of God in the furnace of temptations, thou hast joined the choir of the saved, and with them now dost sing, O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt Him above all for ever!

Truly setting a watch over thy lips, thou didst not utter a single harsh word, unceasingly praising the Lord, and speaking to thy servants as to brethren. Wherefore, those who honor thee dost thou urge to sing with heart and mouth: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise and exalt Him above all for ever!

Mortifying the flesh without mercy, abiding in prayer like one of the bodiless ones, and watering thy soul with tears, thou didst quench the flame of the passions. Wherefore, praising the all-holy Creator now with the fiery choirs of the heavenly hosts, cease thou never to pray for us, that we may be delivered from everlasting fire and may chant in a place of refreshment, O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise and exalt Him above all for ever!

*Theotokion:* With the angels, O Mother of God, and with the apostles, martyrs and prophets, beseech Christ to save those who cry out, O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt Him above all for ever!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The thrice-blessed youths, disdaining the golden image and beholding the immutable and living image of God, chanted in the midst of the flame: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Showing the patience of Job in the midst of tribulation, and then delivered therefrom, O blessed one, thou didst cry with the apostle: I thank Thee, O Christ my God, that Thou hast granted me not only to believe in Thee, but also to suffer for Thy sake. I praise Thee for ever!

Emulating the Queen of the South, thou didst earnestly make haste to the King of kings to learn wisdom of Him; yet, unable to sate thyself on the sweetness of His words, thou hast made thine abode with Him without end forever!

Worshipping the one Creator, O divinely wise one, truly loving His creation and unceasingly marvelling at the wisdom of God, thou didst cry out, dancing: Let all existent creation praise the Lord, and exalt Him above all for ever!

*Theotokion:* O great treasure of the universe, restoration of the fallen human race, in thee do we boast, O Virgin; in thee do we delight; thee do we exalt above all for ever!

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Thy bed, adorned with gold and fine linen, thou didst disdain, O divinely wise one, and didst humbly lie in a nest of sticks and bones upon the ground, that thou mightest utterly vanquish the passions. Wherefore, with love do we magnify thee, who with the saints now reclinest at the banquet of Christ in the never-ending day.

By nature a weak woman, but in spirit stronger than men; in glory and honor an empress, but in humility a handmaid of Christ, O blessed Theophania, thou hast been reckoned a favorite among the choirs of God, for thine alms and ascetic feats were remembered before God, and thou hast now been glorified by Christ and by His Church; and we all unceasingly magnify thee with heart and lips.

O blessed empress, accept thou mine inadequate prayers and praises, offered to thee from impure lips, and as in thine earthly sojourn thou didst not abandon even one in thy love, having merciful concern for all, so also now unceasingly entreat Christ God on behalf of us that hymn thee, and protect us from every misfortune and temptation, that with all our soul we may magnify thee as our holy helper.

*Theotokion:* Oh, thy wonders which surpass comprehension! for thou, O Virgin, hast given to all who are under the sun to understand the newest wonder of thine inexplicable birthgiving. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Thou art all desire, all sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the Virgin, God of gods, all-holy Lord of the saints. Wherefore, we magnify Thee and her who gave Thee birth.

O Theophania, beloved of God, divinely revealed, divinely blessed, we magnify thee who hast been illumined with earthly and heavenly glory and hast been crowned by Christ with a twofold crown.

Before the shrine of thy healing relics doth the Imperial City fervently bow down, and thy struggles are proclaimed throughout the whole world. Wherefore, Christian people everywhere magnify thee.

O Theophania, vouchsafe unto us, also, to dwell where thou shinest forth in unwaning glory, that we may thankfully magnify thee.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, all-hymned Theotokos, unashamed hope of all the world, Mother of Life and cause of joy, thee do we magnify.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; Glory.., that of the saint—

What shall we call thee, O Theophania? What shall we name thee? Empress? for thou wast seated upon the throne of the Imperial City. Handmaid of Christ? for thou wast adorned with humility of mind. Venerable one? for with a hair shirt didst thou clothe thyself. Passion-bearer? for thou didst endure prison and tribulation. Merciful? for thou didst open thy hands and heart to all. Or wise virgin? for thou didst light thy lamp with the grace of the Holy Spirit. O blessed one, entreat Christ God on behalf of those who faithfully honor thy struggles!

