The Sunday Before The Nativity Of Christ

Which Falls On The Sunday On Or After The 18th Day Of December

Commemoration Of The Holy Fathers

At Little Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” the stichera of the Resurrection and to the Theotokos, as usual.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the entire kathisma.

N.B. If this Sunday fall on either the 18th or 19th of December, at “Lord, I have cried...,” we chant 3 stichera to the Resurrection, 3 by Anatolius, and 3 to the Fathers.

But if it fall between the 20th and 23rd of December, we chant 3 stichera to the Resurrection, 1 sticheron by Anatolius, 3 stichera for the forefeast, and 3 of the fathers.

The stichera for the forefeast, in Tone VI, the composition of Anatolius: Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside...”—

The never-setting Sun doth come to shine forth from the Virgin’s womb and to enlighten all the world. Let us make haste to meet Him with pure eyes and deeds; and let us now make ready in spirit to receive Him Who cometh into His own through a strange birth, as He hath been well pleased to may be born in Bethlehem, that, as He is compassionate, He might lead us up who have estranged ourselves from the life of Eden.

God the Word, Who is upborne upon the shoulders of the cherubim, having united Himself hypostatically to the flesh, hath made His abode within the womb of the all-immaculate one and become a man; and He hath come to earth to be born of the tribe of Judah. The holy cave is beautifully adorned, like a most magnificent palace, for the King of all; and the manger, wherein the Virgin Mary layeth the Infinite One as a babe, is like a fiery throne, and serveth for the renewal of creation.

In a manger of dumb beasts doth the Virgin lay Thee, O unoriginate Word of God, Who, in manner which passeth understanding, hast received a beginning. For Thou comest to put an end to that foolishness which I assumed through the malice of the serpent, and to be wrapped in swaddling clothes, that Thou mightest rend asunder the rags and chains of my transgressions, O Thou who alone art good and lovest mankind. Wherefore, I glorify Thee and I hymn and most joyfully worship Thine advent in the flesh, whereby I have been set free.

The stichera of the holy Fathers, in the same tone and melody—

Unto the ends of the earth hath the memory of the forefathers been manifest as truly filled with light and shining with rays of grace; for Christ, the radiant Sun, shining from afar on high, doth lead forth an assembly of stars which shineth with Him, and in the midst of Bethlehem a nativity is shown to be that of God and man. Therefore, piously clapping our hands, with faith let us all join chorus to utter praise unto His nativity before the feast. \#\#\#*Twice*, if the Sunday fall before December 20th

Rejoicing today, Adam is adorned with the glory of divine communion, as the foundation and confirmation of the wise forefathers; and with him Abel doth leap for joy and Enoch is glad, and Seth danceth together with Noah; the all-praised Abraham doth chant with the patriarchs, and from on high Melchizedek doth behold a birth wherein a father had no part. Wherefore, celebrating the divine memory of the forefathers of Christ, we beseech Him, that our souls be saved.

With gladness hath the assembly of the divinely wise children in the furnace shone forth, and it proclaimeth the nativity of Christ on earth; for the Lord, descending like a precious dew, doth preserve unconsumed her who gave Him birth, doth keep her undefiled and doth enrich her with divine gifts. Wherefore, the God-pleasing Daniel rejoiceth in gladness, for he hath clearly foreseen the Stone uncut from the mountain, and with boldness doth now pray in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., to the Fathers, in Tone VI—

Daniel, the man of divine desires, seeing Thee, the Stone uncut by human hands, O Lord, prophetically called Thee a babe born without seed, the Word incarnate of the Virgin, the immaculate God, the Savior of our souls.

Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone, the composition of Byzantius—

Splendidly adorn thyself, O cave, for the ewe-lamb cometh who doth bear Christ in her womb! O manger, receive thou Him Who by a word doth release us mortals from irrational activity! Ye piping shepherds, bear witness to the awesome wonder! Ye magi from Persia, bring forth gold, frankincense and myrrh, for the Lord hath appeared from the Virgin Mary. And the Mother, regarding Him as befitteth a handmaid, worshipped Him and cried out in greeting unto Him Who was laid in her arms: How wast Thou sown within me? How didst Thou spring forth in me, O my Deliverer and God?

Or, if this Sunday fall on the 18th or 19th of December: Now and ever..., the Dogmaticon of the Tone.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from Genesis \(14:14-20\).

Abram, having heard that Lot his nephew had been taken captive, numbered his own home-born ­servants three hundred and eighteen, and pursued after them to Dan. And he came upon them by night, he and his servants, and he smote them and pursued them as far as Hoba, which is on the left of Damascus. And he recovered them all the cavalry of Sodom, and he recovered Lot his nephew, and all his possessions, and the women and the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after he returned from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and the kings with him, to the valley of Shaveh, this was the plain of the kings. And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth loaves and wine, and he was the priest of the Most High God. And he blessed Abram, and said: “Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, Who made heaven and earth, and blessed be the Most High God Who delivered thine enemies into thy power.

A Reading from Deuteronomy \(1:8-11, 15-17\).

In those days, Moses said to the children of Israel: “Behold, God hath delivered the land before you, \[saying:\] ‘Go in and inherit the land, which I sware to your fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, to give it to them and to their seed after them.’ And I spake to you at that time, saying: I shall not be able by myself to bear you. The Lord your God hath multiplied you, and behold, ye are today as the stars of heaven for multitude. The Lord God of your fathers add to you a thousandfold more than you are, and bless you as He hath spoken to you. So I took of you wise and understanding and prudent men, and I set them to rule over you as rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and officers to your judges. And I charged your judges at that time, saying: Hear causes between your brethren, and judge rightly between a man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Thou shalt not have respect to persons in judgment, thou shalt judge small and great equally, thou shalt not shrink from before the person of a man, for the judgment is God’s.

A Reading from Deuteronomy \(10:14-21\).

In those days, Moses said to the children of Israel: “Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens belong to the Lord thy God, the earth and all things that are in it. Only the Lord chose your fathers to love them, and He chose out their seed after them, even you, beyond all nations, as at this day. Therefore ye shall circumcise the hardness of your heart, and ye shall not harden your neck. For the Lord your God, He is God of gods, and terrible God, Who doth not accept persons, nor will He by any means accept a bribe: executing judgment for the stranger and orphan and widow, and He loveth the stranger to give him food and raiment. And ye shall love the stranger, for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve Him, and shalt cleave to Him, and shalt swear by His name. He is thy boast, and He is thy God, Who hath wrought in the midst of thee these great and glorious things, which thine eyes have seen.”

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and this sticheron of the Fathers, in Tone I—

The prophets of great renown, splendid in the rays of divine eloquence, are ever blessed, and, putting forth the sayings of the Spirit as fruit, they preached to all the ineffable nativity of Christ God; and having lived most wondrously, they ended their lives in accordance with the law.

Glory..., in Tone III, the composition of Germanus—

Come, ye lovers of the feasts of the Church, and with psalms let us praise the assembly of the forefathers: Adam, the forefather of us all, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and, after the Law, Moses and Aaron, Joshua, Samuel and David, and, with them, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and the twelve prophets, together with Elijah, Elisha and all the rest, Zechariah and the Forerunner: who all preached Christ, the Life and Resurrection of our race.

Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Adorn thyself splendidly, O Bethlehem, for Eden hath been opened! Make ready, O Ephratha, for Adam is restored, and Eve with him; for the curse is annulled, the salvation of the world hath blossomed forth, and the souls of the righteous are adorned. And bearing hymnody as a gift of offering instead of myrrh, they receive salvation of soul and incorruption. For, lo! He Who lieth in the manger doth command before, that a spiritual hymn be chanted by those who cry out unceasingly: O Lord, glory be to Thee!

But if this Sunday fall before the 20th of December: Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Without seed, through the divine Spirit and by the will of the Father didst thou conceive the Son of God, Who is begotten of the Father without mother before the ages; to Him Who, for our sake, was born of thee without father didst thou give birth in the flesh, and thou didst nourish Him as a babe with thy milk. Wherefore, cease thou never to pray that our souls be delivered from misfortunes.

At the Aposticha, the stichera of the Resurrection. But if this Sunday fall on the 24th of December, these stichera, in Tone II—

*Automelon:* O house of Ephratha, thou holy city, glory of the prophets: adorn thou the house wherein the Divine One is born.

*Stichos:* God shall come out of Thaeman, and the Holy One out of a mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.

*Idiomela:* O Bethlehem, land of Judah, splendid habitation of Him Who is incarnate: prepare thou the divine cave wherein God is born in the flesh of the holy Virgin who hath not known man, that He might save the world!

*Stichos:* O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; O Lord, I have considered Thy works, and I was amazed.

Come ye all, and with faith let us celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, and noetically let us put forth like a star the hymn of the glorification of the magi, and with the shepherds let us cry out: The salvation of men hath come from the Virgin’s womb, summoning the faithful.

Glory..., in the same tone, the composition of Cyprian—

Rejoice, ye honorable prophets who dedicated yourselves well to the law of the Lord, and by faith revealed yourselves as unshaken and unbreakable pillars of Christ; and, having passed on to heaven, beseech Him to grant peace to the world and to save our souls.

Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone, the composition of Cyprian—

Behold, the hour of our salvation hath arrived! Make ready, O cave, for the Virgin approacheth to give birth! Rejoice and be glad, O Bethlehem, land of Judah, for from thee shall our Lord shine forth! Hearken, ye mountains and hills, and ye surrounding lands of Judæa, for Christ cometh to save man whom He created, in that He loveth mankind!

N.B. But if this Sunday fall before the 20th of December: Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O new wonder greater than all the wonders of the past! For who hath ever known a mother to give birth without having known a man, and to bear on her arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? Yet it was the will of God to be born. O all-pure one, who bore Him in thine arms as an infant and hast maternal boldness before Him: cease not to pray in behalf of those who honor thee, that He have compassion and save our souls.

After the Blessing of the Loaves, the Theotokion “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice...,” twice, and the troparion to the Fathers, once, in Tone II—

Great are the accomplishments of faith! In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing water, the three holy children rejoiced; and the prophet Daniel was shown to be a shepherd of lions, as of sheep. By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our souls!

N.B. But if this Sunday fall on the 24th of December, the above troparion of the fathers, twice, and the following troparion of the forefeast, once, in Tone IV—

Once Mary, bearing in her womb an Offspring conceived without seed, was registered in Bethlehem with the elder Joseph, as being of the seed of David. And while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. There was no room for them in the inn. But the cave showed itself to be a beauteous palace for the Queen, and Christ is born to raise up the image that fell of old!

Reading.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the Resurrection, twice; Glory..., that of the Fathers; Now and ever..., either the Theotokion, or the troparion of the forefeast.

The usual kathismata and the sessional hymns of the resurrection, with their Theotokia.

The Gospel Lesson of the Tone.

N.B. But if this Sunday fall on the 24th of December, we chant these Sessional hymns:

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph was amazed...”—

In the fathers — in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Judah and the other patriarchs, Jesse, David and the rest, didst Thou mystically prophesy the manifestation of God which would come to pass on earth, that of Thy preëternal Son from the Virgin, Christ, Who hath appeared in Bethlehem prophesying in the Spirit and Who calleth out to all who are in the world.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the above is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

O ye faithful, let us joyously celebrate the feast of the divine fathers, and, honoring Adam and Abel, blessing Seth and Enos, let us hymn Enoch, Noah, Shem and Japheth. Let us praise Abraham, who shone forth in faith before the law, and the divine Isaac, Jacob, Judah and Levi, and the chaste Joseph, and let us faithfully cry out: O God-bearing forefathers, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who, with love, celebrate your holy memory.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the above is repeated.

After the chanting of Psalm 118, and the usual Evlogitaria, this Sessional hymn to the fathers, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

With hymns let us all praise Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the meek David, Joshua, and the twelve patriarchs, together with the three youths who quenched the fiery flame with the power of the Spirit. And let us cry out to them: Rejoice, ye who bravely denounced the deception of the mad king! Pray ye to Christ, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love.

Glory..., Now and ever..., another Sessional hymn, in the same tone and melody—

From the bosom of the Father didst Thou come down, and in Thine ineffable condescension didst Thou take upon Thyself poverty like unto ours, in manner surpassing nature, O Thou Who lovest mankind. It was Thy good pleasure to make Thine abode in a cave, O Lord, and like as a babe art Thou suckled at Thy Mother’s breast, Who art Creator and Lord. Wherefore, the magi, guided by the star, bring gifts unto Thee and cry out: Glory in the highest to God, Who cometh to earth to be born as a man!

N.B. But if this Sunday fall on either the 18th or the 19th of December, this Theotokion—

Like the widow who gave two mites as an offering, I offer thee the praise of thanksgiving which is thy due, O Mistress, for all thy gifts; for thou art shown to be a shelter and aid, ever rescuing me from temptations and tribulations. Wherefore, delivered from those who afflict me, as from the midst of a burning furnace, I cry out to thee with all my heart: O Theotokos, help me by entreating Christ God to grant me remission of transgressions, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.

The Song of Ascents. Prokimenon of the Tone.

The Canons

N.B. If this Sunday fall on either the 18th or the 19th of December: The canon to the Resurrection from the Octoechos, with four troparia, including its Irmos; the canon to the Cross and the Resurrection, with two troparia; the canon to the Theotokos, with two troparia; and the canon to the fathers, with six troparia.

But if this Sunday fall between the 20th and the 23rd of December: The canon to the Resurrection from the Octoechos, with four troparia, including the Irmos; the canon for the forefeast, with four troparia; and the canon to the fathers, with six troparia \(excluding the initial two troparia of that canon, which are to the Resurrection\).

If, however, this Sunday fall on the 24th of December, then the canon to the fathers, with eight troparia, including the Irmos, and that of the forefeast, with six troparia.

Ode I

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* The children of those who were saved have concealed beneath the earth Him Who of old covered the pursuing tyrant with the waves of the sea; but let us chant unto the Lord like the maidens: Gloriously hath He been glorified.

Through fear are the gates of death thrown open unto Thee, and the everlasting portals are cast down, for through Thine honorable descent have the dead of old arisen, hymning Thy Resurrection with gladness, O Christ.

God, before Whom those of heaven and earth tremble, willeth to stand before the tribunal of Pilate, as One condemned by the judge of an iniquitous trial, and is struck in the face by the hands of the unrighteous.

Troparia to the Fathers:

Today the assembly of the divine fathers doth radiantly celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, and most glorious grace doth prefigure it, for Abraham and the children of the Law are an image thereof.

Of old the sacred Abraham received One of the three Persons of the Godhead, and now the Word of the Father, Who is equally enthroned with Him, doth, through the divine Spirit, come to the children, He Who is gloriously praised.

The children who cast down ungodliness in the furnace are in number and faith images of the divine Trinity, and they have revealed to the world the hidden mysteries of God.

Abraham was delivered from the hands of the unrighteous, and the divine youths and Daniel the prophet were once saved from the flame of the furnace and from the den of wild beasts. Wherefore, we now celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O joyous and unwedded Mother, incorrupt Virgin, we bless thee, for thou didst blossom forth from the generation of Abraham and the tribe of David, and gavest birth unto Christ, Who of old was foretold by the prophets.

Canon of the Forefeast, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

The Virgin now cometh to Bethlehem to give birth to Christ, Who becometh a babe in the flesh, to Christ, Who of His own will hath beggared Himself, to Christ, Who becometh visible. Let heaven and earth rejoice!

Leap up, ye mountains and hills! Join chorus, ye divinely eloquent prophets! Ye people and nations, clap your hands! Our salvation and Enlightenment, Who is born in the city of Bethlehem, hath nearly come.

*Theotokion:* Without change is God known as man through the Virgin who hath not known wedlock; He Who is rich becometh poor, enriching those who, through malice, have been reduced to poverty. Let us all hymn Him with praises, for He hath been glorified.

Katavasia “Christ is born...”

Ode III

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Creation, beholding Thee, Who suspended the whole earth without support upon the waters, Thyself suspended upon Golgotha, was seized with great awe, crying out: None is holy save Thee, O Lord!

Having spent three days in the tomb, by Thy life-creating Resurrection Thou didst raise up the dead of past ages, and, loosed from condemnation, they rejoiced with gladness, crying out: Behold, Thou hast come as our Deliverance, O Lord!

Glory to Thine arising, O our Savior, for, as Almighty, Thou hast delivered us from hell, corruption and death, and, crying out, we say: None is holy save Thee, O Lord Who lovest mankind!

Troparia to the Fathers:

Faithfully preserving the glory of the image and likeness of God, with the fire of the Spirit the children, as champions, extinguished the fire of the golden image, chanting: We know but one Lord!

The captive children, clothed with the wisdom and power of the Spirit, put to shame the wise men of Babylon and boldly cried out: None is holy save Thee, O Lord Who lovest mankind!

The law doth rejoice and joineth chorus with the children and the prophets and doth exult today before the divine advent of the Lord. And Abraham doth rejoice, for from his seed hath the incarnate Lord appeared.

*Theotokion:* A conception without pain, an acceptance of thy birthgiving hath transpired in manner beyond recounting, O Theotokos, for the Word of God, Who is God and was proclaimed by the prophets, hath shown Himself to be a mystery beyond nature.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* To Christ God, the Son Who was begotten of the Father without corruption before time began, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

He Who in manner past understanding was born of the Father before the ages, hath become incarnate of the Virgin in latter times, as He Himself knew, desiring to restore humanity, which had become corrupt through the counsel of the evil serpent.

The unoriginate Son of God, Who is enthroned with the Father and the Spirit in the highest, beholding human nature which had been humbled, doth accept a beginning and desireth to be born in the flesh as man.

*Theotokion:* She who is more holy than the angels and all creation doth now give birth without seed to the Angel of Great Counsel in the flesh, for the restoration of all who unceasingly chant unto Him: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Hypacoi, in Tone VIII—

An Angel bedewed the children in the furnace, and hath now put an end to the lamentation of the myrrh-bearing women, saying: Why bring ye myrrh? Whom seek ye in the tomb? Christ God is risen, for He is the life and salvation of the human race!

Ode IV

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Foreseeing Thy divine condescension upon the Cross, Habbakuk cried out in awe: Thou hast cut down the dominion of the mighty, O Good One, entering into fellowship with those who are in hades, in that Thou art Almighty.

Thy divine descent into hell, O Christ God, was shown to be life for the dead; for Thou didst restrict the dominion of the enemy below, O Good One, and didst open a path for men to heaven.

The all-pure body of the Deliverer, which lay in the tomb, did not decay, but, as mighty, Thou didst break down the gates of hades and didst rise again in glory on the third day, O Christ!

Troparia to the Fathers:

Let us honor Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as the firstfruits of the fathers, for from their seed hath Christ shone forth incarnate of the Virgin, in that He is almighty.

Indicating the coming events of the descent of Christ unto all, Daniel clearly showed forth lions as sheep, for, as a prophet of God, he foresaw the future.

Not attracted by the poison of sin, O children, ye were delivered from the flame; for, being of wisdom more pure than gold, ye were not melted in the furnace of deception.

*Theotokion:* O honored and all-pure one, thine Offspring, Who transcendeth nature, is proclaimed aloud to be the expectation of the nations and the salvation of the world. And today the multitude of the fathers doth hymn Him.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou hast given rise unto a staff from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, putting forth the unfading Blossom of the Creator of all, Who, as God, doth with flowers adorn all the earth, which crieth aloud to Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Word of God, Thou hast come to edify me, who have been despoiled through evil food and dragged down in mind and made like unto dumb beasts; and, becoming a babe, Thou didst lie down in a manger of dumb beasts. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* O Jesus, Habbakuk foresaw Thee incarnate of the Virgin, the mountain overshadowed, breaking down the mountains and hills of evil, and giving over to utter destruction the arrogance of the evil one and the uprisings of the demons.

Ode V

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Isaiah, rising at dawn out of the night, and beholding the never-waning light of Thy theophany, O Christ, which hath mercifully come to pass for us, cried out: The dead shall rise up and those who are in the tombs shall arise, and all born on earth shall rejoice.

The angel, manifestly symbolizing that which radiates joy, is shown forth as a light-bearer in the tomb, proclaiming the resurrection to the women; and, setting aside their lamentation, they rejoiced in the risen Christ, from Whom they received unending joy.

O Good One, Who in Thy loving-kindness assumed a form like ours, of Thine own will Thou wast nailed to the Cross for the sake of me who, of old in paradise rejected Thy holy commandment for the sake of food; and Thou hast died as a man, granting me life.

Troparia to the Fathers:

Let us honor today the divine Daniel, of the race of Abraham, the firstfruit of the fathers, as a leader of the law and of grace; for, as a prophet of God, he foretold the advent of Christ from the Virgin and goeth forth to meet His divine nativity.

Clearly prefiguring through the Angel’s descent the coming of the Lord unto us, the children of Abraham extinguished the furnace; and, rendering the flame dewy by their faith, they consumed the splendor of the golden image therein.

Through the Spirit, Daniel closed the mouths of the wild beasts in the pit; and through grace the children of Abraham quenched the strength of the fire. And, saved from corruption, they proclaim Christ Who is born of the Virgin, entreating Him as the Deliverer of our salvation.

*Theotokion:* Revealing through the divine Spirit Thy painless assumption of our nature, and keeping vigil in the law of grace, O Lord, Isaiah cried out: From the race of Abraham and the tribe of Judah doth a Virgin come, giving birth in the flesh without seed.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

As the most perfect Son of God, the Master by nature, in Thy loving-kindness wast well pleased to be called the Son of man and reckoned among slaves, O most Compassionate One. Wherefore, willingly beggaring Thyself, Thou comest to be born in a cave, O All-good One.

O Christ our King, Who art uncontainable by nature, how can a little cave receive Thee? How can a manger hold Thee, Who comest in the flesh to Thine own for our sake, from a Mother who knew not wedlock, that Thou mightest save those who have been estranged from Thee, O Lord?

*Theotokion:* The Shepherd’s ewe-lamb hath come to give birth. Make ready, O holy cave! Make haste, ye shepherds, to see the newborn Shepherd and Lamb! Ye magi, prepare yourselves with gifts to worship Him as King in the flesh.

Ode VI

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

By Thy three-day burial, O Good One, Thou didst bring about the mortification of death and the destruction of hell; and, having risen, O good Jesus, in godly manner Thou hast poured forth life upon those who are in the world. *Twice*

Troparia to the Fathers:

Hospitable was the nature and exalted was the faith of Abraham the forefather. Wherefore, receiving in image the divine mystery, he rejoiced, and, running before Christ, he now maketh merry.

The faith of the youths now holdeth creation subject by the gift of the Creator, for the all-devouring and shameless fire stood in awe of those who honor Jesus Christ, the Creator of fire.

Once Daniel the prophet, closing the mouths of the lions in the pit, showed in godly manner that through the coming of Christ the savagery of the world is in harmony with divine peace.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, Mother who knewest not man, from a virgin womb didst thou give birth unto Christ, Whom the prophets beheld in the Spirit; and the fathers who begot Him now join chorus before His nativity.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

O Mistress, as a new heaven thou dost come, that Christ, the Sun of glory, might shine forth in the flesh from thy womb, as through a cloud, in the cave; for, in His boundless loving-kindness, He desireth splendidly to illumine all who are of this earth with rays of His own light.

Thou didst perceive our infirmity and misery, O compassionate Christ, and didst not disdain us; but, without leaving the Father, Thou didst abase Thyself and make Thine abode in the womb of her who knew not wedlock, who now cometh forth to give birth unto Thee, without pain, in the cave.

*Theotokion:* Ye mountains and hills, fields and vales, people and generations, nations and every creature: exult, filled with divine gladness, for the deliverance of all, the Word of God, the Timeless One, Who in His loving-kindness hath come under time, doth come with haste.

N.B. If this Sunday fall on the 18th or 19th of December, we chant this kontakion to the fathers, in Tone VI—

O thrice-blessed ones, who did not honor an image wrought by hands, but were defended by the indescribable Essence, ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; and, standing in the midst of unbearable flame, ye called upon God, saying: Make speed and haste Thou to help us, O Compassionate One, in that Thou art merciful; for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!

*Ikos:* Stretch forth Thy hand whereby of old the warring Egyptians and the embattled Hebrews were tested. Forsake us not, lest death, which thirsteth after us, swallow us up; and spare our souls, as Thou once didst spare Thy three children in Babylon, who glorified Thee unceasingly and were cast for Thy sake into a furnace, from whence they cried out to Thee: Make speed and haste Thou to help us, O Compassionate One, in that Thou art merciful; for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!

But if this Sunday fall within the prefestal period, we chant this kontakion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “The choir of angels...”—

Be glad, O Bethlehem! Make ready, O Ephratha! For, lo! she who beareth the Lamb and great Shepherd in her womb doth make haste to give birth. Beholding this, the God-bearing fathers are glad, with the shepherds hymning the Virgin who giveth milk.

*Ikos:* Beholding the splendid radiance of thy birthgiving, O Virgin, the God-loving Abraham, the ever-memorable Isaac, Jacob and all the divinely assembled choir of saints rejoice, and, with joyous utterances, they lead creation forth to meet thee; for thou art shown to be the mediatress of joy for all, having conceived in thy womb Him Who once was seen in Babylon, Who preserved unconsumed the youths that had been cast unjustly into the furnace, and Who showed thee forth in manner past all comprehension. Wherefore, the young maidens chant unto Him Who is borne in thine arms, hymning thee as the Virgin who giveth milk.

Ode VII

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* O ineffable wonder! He, Who in the furnace delivered the venerable children from the flame, is laid in the grave, dead and devoid of breath, for the salvation of us who chant: O God our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

O strange wonder! The Lord, Who sitteth upon a throne in the highest, in assuming flesh hath endured death; but He hath arisen through the might of the Godhead, raising with Himself the dead of past ages.

Thou didst shake the might of death and didst rise again, granting resurrection unto those who truly glorify Thee, the Lord, and that chant unto Thee with Orthodox faith: O God, our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

Troparia to the Fathers:

O father Abraham, progenitor of thy race, having begotten Christ in the flesh, thou art clearly revealed by the Spirit as the father of nations, unto the salvation of us who chant: O God, our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

Thy hymn of the inspired ones hath put to shame those who utter soulless noises, for the youths, bodily trampling down unharmed the furnace which burned with fire, chant: O God, our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

Of old, the prophet Daniel, gazing with spiritual vision, revealed the second coming of Christ, and he foretelleth the dreadful things which shall come to pass therein, crying out: O God, our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O strange wonder, known among the prophets and revealed of old to the fathers: a pure Virgin is come, desiring to give birth unto the salvation of us who chant: O God, our Deliverer, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The children raised together in piety, disdaining the ungodly command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The divine vine whereon the incorrupt Cluster did ripen, draweth nigh, coming to give birth unto Him Who poureth forth the wine of gladness and watereth us who cry out to Him: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The divine phial which beareth within herself the fragrant Myrrh cometh to pour It out in the cave of Bethlehem, filling with mystic fragrance those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* The tongs which Isaiah the prophet beheld of old cometh, holding in her womb Christ, the divine Ember, which burneth up all the fuel of sin and enlighteneth the souls of the faithful.

Ode VIII

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Fall back in awe and fear, O heaven; and let the foundations of the earth be shaken! For, lo! He Who dwelleth in the highest is numbered among the dead and sojourneth as a stranger in a small tomb. Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him ­supremely for all ages!

O, Thine ineffable condescension toward us sinners, O Christ! For, lo! having tasted death, though Thou art immortal God, Thou wast laid in the tomb as a man. But Thou didst rise again, O Word, raising with Thyself those who were below and who exalt Thee supremely for all ages.

Every ear is struck with awe at how the Most High willingly came to earth to destroy the power of hell with His Cross and burial, and how with Himself He hath raised up all to cry: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Troparia to the Fathers:

Prefiguring Thy sacrifice, O Christ, Abraham, obedient to Thee, O Master, went forth with faith, desiring to sacrifice on the mountain the son whom he had begotten; but he returned with him, rejoicing and glorifying and exalting above all Thee, the Deliverer of the world.

When Thou didst clothe Thyself in ever-blazing flame as in a divine robe, O Christ, Thou didst utterly extinguish the fire for the three holy children, and by Thy descent the dew cried out unto those who chant: Ye priests, hymn and exalt Him supremely forever!

The prophet Daniel is given to the lions as food by an unjust tribunal, but, through the precept of abstinence, in his piety he had the wild beasts as fellow fasters in the depths of the pit. Through his prayers and those of Abraham and the children, save those who hymn Thee in the world, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* The voices of the prophets faithfully proclaimed Him as Jesus Emmanuel, Who cometh in human form, God and man; and the Virgin Mary, without having known man, giveth birth in the city of Bethlehem unto a Son, the Word Who is equally without beginning, through the Holy Spirit.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In gladness let us cry out with the angels: Glory to God in the highest! The Savior is born! The Master cometh, to Whom the star doth point! The magi hasten to behold Him, a Babe in a manger! Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Among slaves wast Thou enrolled of Thine own will, O Master, subjecting Thyself to the law of Cæsar, that Thou mightest free mankind from slavery to the evil one, O most merciful God. Wherefore, rejoicing, we chant: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O Word Who art without beginning, I bear Thee as a newborn Babe, although I have in no wise known man”, said the Virgin, marvelling. “Whom on earth can I call Thy father? I know not. Wherefore, with all I chant to Thee: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!”

Ode IX

Canon to the Resurrection and the Fathers

*Irmos:* Lament Me not, O Mother, beholding in the tomb the Son Whom thou didst conceive in thy womb without seed; for I shall arise and be glorified, and as God everlasting shall I exalt with glory those who magnify thee with faith and love.

Why dost thou lament, O creation, beholding the Bestower of life as a mortal upon the Cross and in the tomb? For He shall rise again, renewing thee with light; with His resurrection on the third day hath He cast down Hades and raised up with Himself the dead who praise Him.

Even though Thou didst go down into the grave as one dead, O Christ, Bestower of life, yet didst Thou destroy the might of Hades. And raising up with Thyself the dead which it had swallowed up in the past, as God Thou didst give resurrection unto those who magnify Thee with faith and love.

Troparia to the Fathers:

Celebrating the feast of the fathers that were before the law, let us honor Christ, Who, in godly manner, is begotten of them in the flesh; for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who, through faith, are proclaimers of the Spirit and grace, are shown to be the foundation of the prophets and the law.

God, Who by the fire in the bush showed to Moses the godly mystery in manner past understanding, having descended into the fire for the children, showed the flame of the furnace to be dew through the fire of the Essence of His divinity.

The all-holy children, assembling with Abraham, and Daniel, the wondrous prophet of God, Isaac and Jacob, with Moses and Aaron, faithfully join chorus before the nativity of Christ, praying unceasingly that we be saved.

*Theotokion:* All creation doth rejoice in thy birthgiving, O Virgin, for Bethlehem hath opened Eden unto us. And, lo! delighting in the Tree of Life, we all earnestly cry out in faith: Thou hast fulfilled our prayers, O Mistress!

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, Whom praising, we magnify.

O mysteries strange, awesome and most glorious: the Lord of glory hath come to earth and, having beggared Himself, He hath entered a cave in the flesh, seeking to restore Adam and to deliver Eve from her pangs.

By Thy swaddling clothes Thou dost loose the bonds of our sinful falls; by Thy great poverty Thou dost enrich us all, O Compassionate One; and having been laid in a manger of dumb beasts Thou dost release men from irrational malice, O all-unoriginate Word of God.

*Theotokion:* The preaching of the prophets hath reached the ends of the earth, for they foretold Him Who was to come in the fullness of time; and He came and appeared incarnate of the pure Virgin. Let us receive Him with a pure mind!

Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; Glory..., of the Fathers: Spec. Mel: “To the disciples...”—

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the elect of the patriarchs, the fathers before the law, have shone forth like beacons, for all the prophets and the righteous shone forth from them like radiant lamps. With rays of honorable prophecy have they illumined all creation; and they earnestly pray to God in behalf of the world.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Wondrous hath this been! The unblemished ewe-lamb, the granddaughter of Adam and David, giveth birth unto the Lamb, the all-unoriginate Word, in the latter days, as is meet. The forefeast of her ineffable birthgiving doth the multitude of the fathers celebrate fittingly.

N.B. But if this Sunday fall on the 24th day of December, the Exapostilarion of the Resurrection is not chanted, but is replaced by this one to the Fathers—

From the seed of Abraham and the divine forefather David is the all-unoriginate Word brought forth, Who of old wondrously saved the youths equal in number to the Trinity by the descent of the Angel into the flame, and Who transformed the lamentation of the myrrh-bearing women into joy.

Glory..., “Abraham, Isaac and Jacob...” \(see above\)

Now and ever...,

Be glad, O Bethlehem! And thou, O Ephratha, make ready, for the Theotokos cometh to the cave and the manger to give birth ineffably unto God. O dread mystery! Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the patriarchs and prophets, angels and men, now radiantly celebrate the forefeast of His divine advent.

At the Praises, four stichera to the Resurrection, and four to the Fathers, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...”—

Lift up thy voice, O Sion, Thou truly divine city, and proclaim the divine memory of the fathers, honoring Abraham, Isaac and the ever-memorable Jacob; for, lo! we all magnify Judah and Levi, the great Moses and the wondrous Aaron, and we honor David, Joshua and Samuel. And weaving divine hymns into godly praise on the forefeast of Christ’s nativity, we ask that we receive grace from Him, and that He grant the world great mercy. *Twice*

*Stichos:* Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages!

O Elijah, who once rode upon a divine chariot of fire, come thou forth, and thou, O divinely wise Elisha; and together with Ezekiel and Hosea, rejoice! O ye honored and divinely inspired twelve prophets, join chorus, and all ye righteous, chant in hymns unto the nativity of Christ; ye most blessed youths who quenched the flame of the furnace with the dew of the Spirit, entreat Christ in our behalf, that He send down upon our souls great mercy.

*Stichos:* For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.

The Virgin Theotokos, she who through the ages hath been preached on earth by the prophets in their utterances, she whom the wise patriarchs and the assemblies of the righteous proclaim, with whom the comeliness of women joineth chorus—Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel and Hannah, together with the glorious Miriam, the sister of Moses: With them all the ends of the world rejoice and all creation rendereth honor, for the Creator and God of all cometh to be born in the flesh and to grant us great mercy.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

The compilation of the teachings of the law doth reveal the divine birth of Christ in the flesh as being from those who, before the law, proclaimed the glad tidings of grace to those who lived beyond the law. Wherefore, in that this birth is the means of deliverance from corruption, for the sake of the resurrection they declared to the souls held fast in Hades: O Lord, glory be to Thee!

N.B. But if this Sunday fall on the 24th day of December, the following stichera are chanted, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

The proclamation of Isaiah is fulfilled! For, lo! the Virgin beareth in her womb the Incomprehensible and Indescribable One in the flesh, and she cometh most gloriously to receive God. Make ready, O Bethlehem! For it is the King’s pleasure that thou become His abode. O manger, receive Christ wrapped as a babe, Who in His goodness wisheth to loose the bonds of man’s offenses.

Enrolled with slaves, the Master wished to utterly erase the handwriting of our transgressions and to enter in the Book of the Living all who have been slain by the thievery of the serpent. And the Virgin beareth Thee, Who bearest all things, Who art wrapped in mortal flesh and hast been well-pleased to dwell in a little cave. Marvelling at Thy might, the heavenly choirs of angels and the godly shepherds praised Thee Who art born.

The radiant and animate cloud laden with the heavenly Rain now approacheth to pour It forth upon the earth, that It might water the face of the earth. The spring of grace, the noetic swallow, who is pregnant, giveth birth by the ineffable Word, putting an end to the winter of ungodliness. The pure and undefiled palace doth bring forth the incarnate King in the cave.

Glory..., “The compilation of the teachings of the Law... \(see above\)”

Now and ever..., “Most blessed art thou...”

Great Doxology. After the Trisagion, the troparion of the Resurrection.

Litanies and the Dismissal.

We chant the Evangelical Sticheron in the narthex.

First Hour and final Dismissal.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, ten troparia: six from the Octoechos, and four from Ode III of the canon to the Fathers.

After the Entrance, the troparia to the Resurrection and to the Fathers; Glory..., Now and ever..., the kontakion to the Fathers.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV, the Hymn of the Fathers—

Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages!

*Stichos:* For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews \(11:9-11, 17-23, 32-40\).

Brethren: By faith Abraham came to the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: for he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Through faith also Sarah herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called: accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff. By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones. By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king’s commandment. And what more shall I say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthah; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: and others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* O God, with our ears have we heard, for our fathers have told us.

*Stichos:* For Thou hast saved us from those who afflict us, and those who hate us hast Thou put to shame.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. Matthew \(1:1-25\).

The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judah and his brethren; and Judah begat Pharez and Zerah of Tamar; and Pharez begat Hezron; and Hezron begat Ram; and Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon; and Nahshon begat Salmon; and Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab; and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the king. And David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Uriah; and Solomon begat Rehoboam; and Rehoboam begat Abijah; and Abijah begat Asa; and Asa begat Jehoshaphat; and Jehoshaphat begat Jehoram; and Jehoram begat Uzziah; and Uzziah begat Jotham; and Jotham begat Ahaz; and Ahaz begat Hezekiah; and Hezekiah begat Manasseh; and Manasseh begat Amon; and Amon begat Josiah; and Josiah begat Jeconiah and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon. And after they were brought to Babylon, Jeconiah begat Shealtiel; and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel; and Zerubbabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor; and Azor begat Zadok; and Zadok begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud; and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily. But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: and knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name Jesus.

Communion Verses—

Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the highest.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

