The 19th Day Of The Month Of December

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Boniface

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Thou didst desire the goodly name given to martyrs, O much suffering passion-bearer, and didst endure pangs with bold resolve, O most blessed one, expecting to be translated to the rest which is devoid of pain, and seeking to receive heavenly honors, a dwelling-place in paradise, never-waning light and everlasting life.

Thou didst endure the most savage of pangs: the tearing away of thy finger-nails, cruel piercing, molten lead and the severing of thy head, and didst join the choir of athletes, rejoicing, O much suffering one. Wherefore, we celebrate thine annual memorial, O athlete Boniface, converser with the angels.

Sending thee, her manservant, before her, O Boniface, Aglaïs acquired a divine master who tamed the passions, attained mastery over tyrants, cast down the enemy, and was arrayed in a crown of victory. Wherefore, having constructed for thee a holy temple all-adorned, she enshrined thee therein, praising thee in sanctity.

And three stichera of the Theotokos, in the same tone and melody—

*\[These stichera are only chanted on weekdays during the Nativity Fast, if the pastor elect to serve the services in lenten fashion, with the chanting of “Alleluia” at Matins instead of “God is the Lord.” In such a case, at Vespers the stichera of the Theotokos are chanted* first *on “Lord, I have cried...,” followed by the stichera of the saint.\]*

O Mistress, rain down upon me the depths of thy mercy, and as thou art merciful, O Maiden, give drink to my heart, which hath been consumed by the burning heat of the passions; cause drops of compunction to pour forth continually, I pray, whereby I may be vouchsafed the consolation, O pure one, which those who shed tears in sincerity shall receive.

O Mistress, take pity on me who am shaken by the assaults of the demons and have been cast into the pit of destruction; and establish me upon the rock of the virtues. Destroying the counsels of the enemy, vouchsafe that I may follow the precepts of thy Son and our God, that I may receive remission on the day of judgment.

I have fallen among vile and murderous thieves, O most immaculate one, and by their assaults, O Maiden, I have been stripped of the incorrupt garments of heavenly splendor, and have been pitilessly wounded by them and cast down in a place of affliction, barely alive. Yet go thou before me, extend thy hand and raise me up, I pray.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

I lie upon the bed of despondency, O most immaculate one, and pass my life in slothfulness, and I fear the time of mine end, O Theotokos. Let not the most evil serpent rend my lowly soul asunder without pity, like a lion. Wherefore, going before me in thy goodness, before mine end raise me up to repentance.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, O all-pure one, His side pierced by a spear, thou didst cry aloud, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How hath the ungrateful people rewarded Thee for the good Thou didst do them? And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos; and that of the martyr, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With faith I hymn thee, O all-radiant martyr”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Emulating the feats of the valiant athletes with zealous intent, thou didst suffer mightily; and thou didst slay the serpent with thy life-bearing sufferings, O athlete Boniface, converser with the angels.

Beholding the falsehood of the enemy cruelly poured forth on the earth, O valiant passion-bearer, and, having enkindled thy soul and most divine desire, thou didst enter the arena with fearless resolve, O thrice-blessed one.

Illumined with divine wisdom, O blessed one, thou didst make foolish the unwise foe, proclaiming Christ, Who made Himself like us in the coarseness of the flesh, whereby He desired to become manifest, O much-suffering martyr Boniface.

*Theotokion:* All of us, the faithful, hymn the pure Mary with oneness of mind: the mountain of God, which Daniel foresaw, the noetic tabernacle, the sanctuary of glory, the table which held the divine Bread.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

As thou didst desire the freedom on high, O glorious one, thou art delivered from the yoke of slavery, O glorious one, having emulating the honored sufferings of Him Who in His loving-kindness became a servant.

Shown to be above carnal understandings by divine favor, O martyr Boniface, rejoicing, thou didst readily endure every assault of evils.

Thou didst deny thyself, and didst go forth to struggles and contests against the enemy, armed with the Cross as a weapon; and having become a victor, thou hast been glorified, O martyr Boniface.

*Theotokion:* The transcendent God poured Himself forth into thy womb without leaving the bosom of the Father, O most immaculate one, and became thy Son, saving mankind.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Sent to the company of martyrs, thou becamest a true martyr, suffering most mightily for Christ, O most lauded one; and thou didst give thyself to her who sent thee forth with faith, O blessed Boniface. Earnestly pray, that we all may receive perfect forgiveness.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Though I am sin-loving, I beseech thee who gave birth to the sinless God Who taketh away the sins of the world, O all-pure one: Have pity on my greatly sinful soul and wash away my many sins, for thou art the cleansing of sinners and the salvation and help of the faithful.

Stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter times gave birth in the flesh to Thee Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “Woe is me, O most beloved Jesus! How is it that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels art now crucified by iniquitous men, O my Son? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Blessing the endurance of those who suffer, O divinely wise martyr who art most rich, thou didst make thyself like them, emulating their honored sufferings.

Going forth with faith to the divine company of the martyrs, O blessed one, thou didst give thyself to her who desired a right wondrous burden, O divinely wise one.

Purified like gold in the crucible of wounds, O martyr, thou wast shown to be most pure, bearing the image of the sufferings of the Creator.

*Theotokion:* Realizing that thy virginity was sealed in thy birthgiving, O Maiden, with faith thou didst magnify the Word Who was ineffably born of thy womb.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Like a radiant star thou didst rise above the western lands and didst set in the endurance of sufferings, O martyr; and thou didst straightway shine upon the lands of the West, illumining the ends thereof.

As a martyr thou didst suffer the rending away of thy finger-nails and being beaten with sharp reeds, O martyr, breaking the sting of the evil one by faith and grace.

Thou didst weaken the machinations of the enemy directed against thee, O divinely wise one, for, constantly directing thy gaze toward God, thou didst endure the wounding of thy flesh as though thou wast incorporeal.

*Theotokion:* I cry to thee: Wash my soul clean of all defilement, O pure Virgin who gavest birth on earth to God, our true Savior.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Beaten, thou didst inflict fleshly wounds upon the ungodly who were incurably afflicted with ignorance, and thou hast been shown to be a physician of the sick, O athlete Boniface.

Exalted unto God by thy contest of struggles, O blessed passion-bearer, thou didst cut down the invisible foe and becamest an ally of the down-trodden.

Dragged across the ground, O athlete, like a precious stone thou didst cast down the foundation of falsehood, and with faith hast made yet more steadfast the hearts of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* Of old, the bush, which burned yet was in nowise consumed, prefigured thee, O most immaculate Virgin; for, like it, thou wast not consumed when thou gavest flesh to God.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Of thine own will thou didst bring thyself as an unblemished sacred offering to Him Who was born of the Virgin for thy sake, O all-wise Boniface, holy crown-bearer.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Refusing to bend thy knee before graven images, thou wast truly cast into a furnace for yet greater trial; and, bedewed therein, thou didst give thanks to Christ forever.

Seeking to destroy the might of thy confession, the false-minded one pitilessly caused molten lead to be poured into thy bowels; yet was he manifestly put to shame.

In earnestly enduring the severing of thy precious head, thou didst cut off the most wily head of the deceitful enemy with the sword of thy courage, O divinely wise martyr of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Let me hymn thee with fitting melodies, O Maiden. By thy supplications deliver me from sufferings, misfortunes and tribulations, and from evil men who seek to oppress me.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Devising profitable salvation for thee who sought the relics of the right-victorious martyrs, O Boniface, Christ strengthened thee, that thou thyself mightest become such a one through faith.

Thou wast given as a blessed treasure to thy blessed lady, O blessed one; and having been enriched thereby, she chanted with gladness of heart: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Having erected a most sacred temple with zeal, the glorious woman enshrined thee therein, who art the temple of the divine Trinity, O Boniface, passion-bearer of Christ.

Having died for love of the Creator Who slayeth the corrupting passions, by thy supplication clearly bestow life upon those who cry: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

*Theotokion:* The All-divine One, descending upon thee, the pure one, became incarnate, as He knew how, O Virgin, and hath deified men who chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Beholding thee as a sacred burden, the ever-memorable handmaid rejoiced, crying: “I sent thee forth, O blessed one, but I accept thee as my true master, delivering me from slavery to evils by thy right acceptable entreaties!”

Thou hast blossomed like a lily in the noetic valleys of the martyrs, O Boniface; like a palm-tree hast thou grown tall; like a cedar thou hast been recognized as sweetly fragrant; and like a choice cypress hast thou been shown to be, perfuming our souls.

Today the day of thy commemoration hath shone forth like the sun with the radiance of divine gifts, O passion-bearer, illumining the souls of those who hymn thee and dispelling the gloom of the passions, O divinely wise and most blessed martyr.

Thou didst shine forth from the West like the sun, and didst attain unto a city of the East, where, having suffered and set in death, thou didst hasten to life and reach splendid Rome, which thou protectest by thine entreaties.

*Theotokion:* With thy light illumine me who am stuck fast in the darkness of sin, O Theotokos; and grant that I may walk in the daylight of the divine precepts, O Bride of God, that I may hymn thee, the most hymned one.

An Akathist Hymn in honor of St. Boniface is available from the Press as \#S546.

