The 20th Day Of The Month Of December

The Forefeast Of The Nativity In The Flesh Of Our Lord, God & Savior Jesus Christ

Commemoration Of The Repose Of Our Father John Of Kronstadt, The Wonderworker

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Ignatius the God-bearer\)

At Little Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” four stichera, in Tone II—

“O Jesus, Son of God, my strength! O Light of my mind, Thou peace and joy of my heart: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee Who dost deliver me from my invisible enemies!” didst thou cry aloud, O John. Thus do thou also teach us to hymn the Lord with all our heart, O righteous John, servant of Christ. *Twice*

Incarnate, Christ called thieves and harlots to repentance, and thou, O merciful pastor, fulfilling the commandment of the Chief Shepherd, ate with publicans and conversed with sinners, calling all to repentance and teaching all to pray: O God, be merciful to me, a sinner! O merciful God, glory to Thee!

“Ye are the image of God, wherefore preserve ye this great image, the image of God’s beauty, the image of His boundless love, that ye may be children of our Father Who is in heaven, that ye may be holy as your Father is holy.” Thus, O divinely wise pastor, didst thou instruct thy flock, and thus didst thou thyself live in holy manner.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Never hath thy love failed, O merciful father John of Kronstadt. Thou art our hope for correction of life, our pastoral protector, a generous benefactor, our hope, O righteous John.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

O house of Ephratha, thou holy city, glory of the prophets: adorn thou the house wherein the Divine One is born.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV—

Thou didst belong to the Lord from thine infancy, acquiring the sense of a grown man in thy childhood, desiring the wisdom of God; and thou wast wholly a dwelling place of God, O gracious John, our father.

*Stichos:* He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages.

Standing before the Holy Trinity with a mind illumined by grace, O blessed John, with heavenly rays thou hast illumined those who lie in the darkness of sin. Enlighten us also with the light of thy divine vision.

*Stichos:* His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

Light unapproachable abode within thee, O righteous father, and the Lord set thee as a lamp amid the darkness of sin. Wherefore, instructed by thee, we hymn thy gracious memory, O John.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O Lord, Who didst bind Thine apostles with the bond of love, and hast appointed our father John as a new herald of Thy love: Establish even now the Church’s bond of love, O our Savior, that united we may hymn Thee and Thine ineffable goodness.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Sing unto the Lord Who is born of the Virgin! Chant a hymn, ye armies of heaven! Clap your hands, ye mortal men! For God is come among men! Man hath become God by a gift. Lo! a wonder taketh place among us today: Christ, the King of Israel, is come!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

With the apostles thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth; with the confessors thou didst endure sufferings for Christ; thou didst resemble the holy hierarchs in thy preaching of the Word; and with the venerable hast thou shone forth in the grace of God. Therefore, the Lord hath exalted the depths of thy humility above the heavens, and hath given us thy name as a source of most wondrous miracles. Wherefore, O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; and hearken unto thy children, who with faith call upon thee, O righteous John, our beloved pastor.

Or this Troparion, in Tone IV—

O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; hearken unto thy children who with faith call upon thee, expecting compassionate aid from thee, O John of Kronstadt, our beloved pastor.

Glory..., Now and ever..., troparion of the Forefeast, in the same tone—

Make ready, O Bethlehem! Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! Adorn thyself, O Ephratha! For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. Her womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, in the midst of which is the divine Tree, whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. Christ is born, that He might restore His image which fell of old!

Litany and Dismissal.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 of the forefeast, idiomela, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone I—

Let us celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, O ye people, and raising our thoughts on high let us go in spirit to Bethlehem; and with the eyes of our mind let us look upon the Virgin, as she hasteneth to give birth unto our God, the Lord of all. Joseph, when he beheld the magnitude of this wonder, thought that he saw a mortal wrapped as a babe in swaddling clothes; but from all that came to pass he understood that it was the true God, who granteth the world great mercy.

Let us celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, O ye people, and raising our thoughts on high let us go in spirit to Bethlehem, and let us look upon a great mystery in the cave. For Eden is opened once again, when from the pure Virgin God cometh forth, as perfect in His divinity as in His humanity. Wherefore, let us cry aloud: Holy God, Thou Father without beginning! Holy Mighty, Thou Son made flesh! Holy Immortal, Thou Spirit, the Comforter! Holy Trinity, glory be to Thee!

Hearken, O heaven, and give ear, O earth! For, lo! the Son and Word of God the Father cometh forth to be born of a Maiden who hath not known man, through the good pleasure of the Father Who begat Him dispassionately, by the activity of the Holy Spirit. Make ready, O Bethlehem! Throw open thy gates, O Eden! For He Who is becometh that which He was not, and He Who formed all creation Himself taketh form, granting the world great mercy.

And 5 stichera of the saint, in Tone VI, Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside...”—

Having set aside all the things of this world, with one voice let us praise the wondrous beacon of the land of Russia and of the whole world, the good shepherd, the priest John, who hath given us a splendid model of life in Christ, who on earth was aflame with the spirit of prayer, and who received from the Lord a twofold gift of healing. Through his prayers may Christ strengthen us in piety and show us to be steadfast children of the Church, for the salvation of our souls.

With all thy heart and mind, O blessed John, thou didst love the life in Christ. Thinking and doing all things to please God, thy labors bore fruit abundantly through the grace of the priesthood, and at the Lord’s Supper, as if in heaven, with enraptured spirit thou didst stand at the altar of the Lord from day to day with tears of compunction. And now, standing before the Holy Trinity in the highest, offer up prayers, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

By the path of spiritual vigilance, reverence, contemplation of the mysteries of God, amendment of soul, and rest in God, thou didst attain unto the heavenly bridal chamber. By acts of mercy and thy miracles the Church is adorned, by the purity of thy life impiety is put to shame, and by the words of thy writings the Faith is confirmed. Wherefore, we entreat thee, O most honored John: Be thou our guide amid all our circumstances, that guided and guarded by thee, we may be vouchsafed the kingdom of heaven.

And these stichera, in the same tone and melody—

Travailing with all thy heart over the darkness of the nations, thou didst at first think to go to the lands of the East. But, beholding Kronstadt, which was far nearer, perishing, thou didst submit to the call from on high, which came once during sleep through a vision of a temple, O righteous John. “I know,” thou didst say, “the loftiness of the priesthood, yet I hope in God; for I know that He is my strength.” O, the divine power of love, which doth draw us to Christ and strengthen us!

Making room for all in thy pastoral heart, and constrained by the wounds inflicted upon the poor by poverty, thou didst call all people by thy words and by thy writings, to build a house of industry, wherein the poor might find refuge. O teacher of good deeds worked through faith! O nurturer of the souls and bodies of the poor! O John, joy of those who before were in despair! Thy care for such here on earth was a likeness of thine intercession now in heaven.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Thou didst believe in righteousness with thy whole heart, O priest of God, and with thy lips thou didst speak unto salvation: The Lord is my being; the Lord is my deliverance from everlasting death; the Lord is my eternal life; the Lord is my purification, my deliverance and sanctification; the Lord is my strength in weakness, my freedom when I am straightened, my light amid darkness, my peace amid confusion! Glory to Thee, O my Savior, almighty power! Glory to Thee, O Savior, omnipresent power! Glory to Thee, most kind-hearted Compassion! Glory to Thee, Power ever open to my prayers! Glory to Thee, brightest Eye which ever regardest me and beholdest all my hidden things! Wherefore, O holy John, following after thee we also cry out to the Lord: Glory to Thee, O our God, wondrous in Thy saints whose teachings show forth Thy wonder! Glory to Thee!

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Receive, O Bethlehem, the Mother of God, for she approacheth thee to give birth unto the unwaning Light. O ye angels, look down with wonder from heaven; O ye men, give glory on earth! O ye magi from Persia, bring your threefold gift; ye shepherds abiding in the fields, sing ye the thrice-holy hymn: Let everything that hath breath praise the Creator!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. And three Lessons:

Reading from the Prophecy of Joel \(2:12-27\).

Thus saith the Lord: Turn to Me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with lamentation: and rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God: for He is merciful and compassionate, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy, and repenteth of evils. Who knoweth if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat-offering and a drink-offering to the Lord your God? Sound the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, proclaim a solemn service: gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the infants at the breast; let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Between the porch and the altar let the priests that minister to the Lord weep and say: Spare Thy people, O Lord, and give not Thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them, lest they should say among the heathen: Where is their God? But the Lord was jealous of His land, and spared His people. And the Lord answered and said to His people: Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied with them: and I will no longer make you a reproach among the gentiles. And I will chase away from you the northern adversary, and will drive him into the dry land, and I will sink his face in the former sea, and his back parts in the latter sea, and his ill savor shall come up, and his stink shall come up, because he hath wrought great things. Be of good courage, O land; rejoice and be glad: for the Lord hath done great things. Be of good courage, ye beasts of the plain, for the plains of the wilderness have budded, for the trees have borne their fruit, the fig tree and the vine have yielded their strength. Rejoice then and be glad, ye children of Sion, in the Lord your God: for He hath given you food fully, and He will rain on you the early and the latter rain, as before. And the floors shall be filled with corn, and the presses shall overflow with wine and oil. And I will recompense you for the years which the locust, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, and the cankerworm have eaten, even My great army, which I sent against you. And ye shall eat abundantly, and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the Lord your God for the things which He hath wrought wonderfully with you: and My people shall not be ashamed forever. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and that there is none else beside Me: and My people shall no more be ashamed forever.

Reading from the Prophecy of Joel \(2:27-32\).

Thus saith the Lord: Ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and that there is none else beside Me: and My people shall no more be ashamed forever. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. And on My servants and on My handmaids in those days will I pour out of My Spirit. And I will show wonders in heaven and upon the earth: blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Reading from the First Epistle General of John \(4:20-5:5\).

Beloved, if a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth Him Who begat, loveth him also that is begotten of Him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments: and His commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone II—

“O Jesus, Son of God, my strength! O Light of my mind, Thou peace and joy of my heart: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee Who dost deliver me from mine invisible enemies!” didst thou cry aloud, O John. Thus do thou also teach us to hymn the Lord with all our heart, O righteous John, servant of Christ.

Incarnate, Christ called thieves and harlots to repentance; and thou, O merciful pastor, fulfilling the commandment of the Chief Shepherd, ate with publicans and conversed with sinners, calling all to repentance and teaching all to pray: O God, be merciful to me, a sinner! O merciful God, glory to Thee!

“Ye are the image of God; wherefore preserve ye this great image, the image of God’s beauty, the image of His boundless love, that ye may be children of our Father Who is in heaven, that ye may be holy as your Father is holy.” Thus, O divinely wise pastor, didst thou instruct thy flock, and thus didst thou thyself live in holy manner.

Glory..., in Tone I—

“When we pray, we pray through the Holy Spirit; wherefore, all the prayers of the Church are the breathing of the Holy Spirit, and all we Christians are His offspring. Come, therefore, and abide in us, O Holy Spirit! Have mercy on us and renew us all, that we may be the one Body of Christ.” Such was thine unceasing prayer, O most wondrous John our father, and God hearkened unto thee and anointed thee with the oil of eternal joy.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Receive, O manger, Him Whom Moses the Law-giver foresaw in the bush on Horeb, now born of the Virgin through the divine Spirit. This is she of whom the Law speaketh. She is the seal of the prophets, who revealeth in mortal flesh God Whom we adore.

On the Aposticha, these stichera of the saint, in Tone VI—

O most blessed father John, being an emulator of all the saints, thou didst acquire the holy faith of the patriarchs, the zeal of the prophets and the apostles, the sanctity and godly-mindedness of the holy hierarchs, the boldness of the confessors, the freely-given aid of the unmercenary healers, the unceasing prayer of the venerable. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy memory with splendor.

*Stichos:* He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages.

O divinely wise father John, having begun with the fear of God, in understanding thou didst reach the heights of wisdom. And being crucified with Christ by love, having become His very own, thou didst later drive out the fear by love; for fear hath torment, as the Apostle of love hath taught us. Wherefore, O father, thou didst adorn the minds of the faithful and didst teach thy flock to love God. O John, entreat Christ our God, that He grant us also this grace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

The Lord is the strength of my heart, the Lord is the light of my mind, the Lord is my rest and my joy, my faith, hope and love; He is my food and drink, my vesture and protection. Teach us also, O holy father, to understand these words and to place our salvation in the Lord. Grant us of thy goodness, as Elijah granted to Elisha, that all our hope and steadfastness may be in the Lord.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

It was not our fathers that told us, nor our elders that informed us, but we ourselves have seen the miracles that have taken place through thee; we ourselves have experienced the grace that doth pour forth from thee. Our loved ones were healed, they that were dying rose from bed in good health, our every petition was granted through thy prayer. Wherefore, we honor thee as a favorite of God and an intercessor before the Lord.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

O Lord, having come to Bethlehem, Thou didst make thine abode in a cave. Having heaven as Thy throne, Thou didst lie in a manger. Thou Whom hosts of angels surround didst come down to shepherds, that Thou mightest save our race, in that Thou art compassionate. Glory be to Thee!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

With the apostles thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth; with the confessors thou didst endure sufferings for Christ; thou didst resemble the holy hierarchs in thy preaching of the Word; and with the venerable hast thou shone forth in the grace of God. Therefore, the Lord hath exalted the depths of thy humility above the heavens, and hath given us thy name as a source of most wondrous miracles. Wherefore, O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; and hearken unto thy children, who with faith call upon thee, O righteous John, our beloved pastor.

Or this Troparion, in Tone IV—

O wonderworker, who livest in Christ forever, take pity in thy love upon people in misfortunes; hearken unto thy children who with faith call upon thee, expecting compassionate aid from thee, O John of Kronstadt, our beloved pastor.

If there be a vigil, the troparion of the saint, twice, and that of the forefeast, once, in Tone IV—

Make ready, O Bethlehem! Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! Adorn thyself, O Ephratha! For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. Her womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, in the midst of which is the divine Tree, whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. Christ is born, that He might restore His image which fell of old!

At Matins

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Thou didst despise neither stranger nor sojourner, O father John, but wast kind and merciful and compassionate unto all: a father for orphans and a defender for widows, vesture for the naked and food for the hungry. Remember us also, thy poor children, and deny us not thy gracious love.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in Tone I—

He that bowed down the heavens and made His abode in the Virgin now cometh forth in the flesh to be born in the cave of Bethlehem as it was written, and He Who imparteth life to infants in the womb is seen as a babe Himself. Rejoicing now, let us all go forth to meet Him with uprightness of heart.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone V—

Strengthened by divine power, thou didst overcome the temptations of the invisible foe and hast passed on to the unwaning light. Heal thou the sufferings of our souls and direct us by thy counsel, for thou hast been given by God to all as a physician and comforter, O John, our father.

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

Rejoice exceedingly, O Sion! Make ready, O Bethlehem! The Sustainer of all, sending a star before Him, hath proclaimed His infinite condescension. He before Whom the hosts of heaven do tremble, is in very truth born without change of a Virgin, for He alone loveth mankind.

After the Polyeleos, this Magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy and righteous father John, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. \[111: 1\]

B In His commandments shall he greatly delight. \[111: 1\]

A His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. \[111: 2\]

B And his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[111: 3\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[111: 6\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[63: 11\]

B Lo, my lips I shall not restrain, O Lord. \[39: 10\]

A Thou hast understood My righteousness and My truth.

B And my tongue shall treat of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. \[Ps. 34: 28\]

A A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

B The generation of the upright shall be blessed. \[Ps. 111: 2\]

A With glory and honor hast Thou crowned him. \[Ps. 8: 6\]

B For Thou shalt bless the righteous, O Lord. \[Ps 5: 13\]

A As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

B Whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us. \[Lk. 1: 78\]

A To give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. \[Lk 1: 79\]

B To guide our feet into the way of peace. \[Lk. 1: 79\]

Glory…, Now & Ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

A fiery minister of the Word of God and a vessel of faith wast thou, O divinely inspired John; wherefore, the Lord appointed thee a new Abraham, a father of many. Pray thou therefore, O holy father, that we all may be children of God and that our souls may be saved.

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI, Spec. Mel: “The angelic hosts...”—

As the shepherds were piping songs, the angelic host called out and stopped them, saying: Cease now, ye who abide in the fields tending your flocks; and cry aloud and sing that Christ the Lord is born, Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the race of man!

Songs of Ascent, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131:9\]

*Stichos:* Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness. \[Ps. 131:1\]

Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord.

The Gospel according to John

§ 35, from the midpoint \[Jn. 10: 1-8\].

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O earthly angel, friend of men, instrument of the Spirit Comforter, bearer of the love of Christ, griever over all the world and mouth of all the faithful, consolation of the grieving and sorrowful, help of the persecuted, physician of our souls and bodies, father and intercessor, holy and righteous John: come thou and stand with us, that with thee we may offer up praise and thanksgiving unto God the Savior, performing this great solemnity.

Canon of the forefeast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos, in Tone I; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “My life is in Christ, to Whom I chant for all ages,” in Tone IV—

Ode I

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Let us begin this day to celebrate the forefeast of the Nativity of Christ, Who was born in the flesh of the Virgin Mother in the cave at Bethlehem, in His great loving-kindness.

The preëternal God, Who released me from the bonds of sin, is wrapped in swaddling bands, and, seen as a babe, He is laid in a manger. Glory to His dominion!

*Theotokion:* Eden is opened unto Thee, O Master, Who wast born in the flesh of the divine Maiden and Virgin in the city of Bethlehem. We hymn Thine awesome dispensation!

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Make firm my senses and mind, O my Savior, that I may be able worthily to hymn the supplications and struggles of Thy servant John our father, who loved Thee and was beloved of Thee.

O blessed one who from thy youth wast forechosen to chant unto the first-called apostle in his holy temple, illumined with the radiance of the Cross thou didst flee the gloom of sin, unceasingly offering up prayers and hymnody to God our Savior.

On a chariot of the virtues didst thou mount to heaven, as did Elijah on a chariot of fire; wherefore, beseech thou the Lord, that He send down upon us correction of life.

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O Virgin Theotokos, have we received everlasting life who once were deprived of life in paradise; for thou gavest birth unto Him Who alone is without beginning and giveth life unto all.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The same stone which the builders rejected, is become the head-stone in the corner; this is the stone whereon Christ hath established the Church which He redeemed from among the nations.

Let all creation chant the hymnody of the forefeast unto Him Who was begotten of the Father before the morning star, and hath now shone forth ineffably from the Virgin, and is born in Bethlehem, in His great loving-kindness.

A star hath already shone forth from the tribe of Judah; and, recognizing it, the kings are journeying from the East, and hasten to behold Christ born in the flesh in Bethlehem.

*Theotokion:* Isaiah, knowing of this incarnation of Christ, clearly foretelleth through the Holy Spirit: Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name ‘God with us,’ and the government shall be upon his shoulder.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

One who shared in the manner of life of the apostles and an emulator of their life wast thou, O divinely inspired one, and thou didst set forth the word of truth unto the end.

The eye of thy soul beheld the kingdom of heaven, for it was pure; wherefore, thou didst splendidly set forth thy life, and, honoring it in God, we glorify thee.

Let him who doth not labor not eat! These words of the Apostle Paul didst thou proclaim to thy brethren; wherefore, thou didst raise up a house of industry for the sake of the poor, wherein the impoverished and ailing might be provided for, being sustained by the work of their own hands.

*Theotokion:* Thou art wholly light, all goodness, all wisdom; thou canst, as Mother of the Almighty, do all things; thou alone art all-perfect, in that thou art the Mother of the all-perfect King of glory.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

To Christ, the Son Who was begotten of the Father incorruptibly before the ages, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord, Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Today the Virgin cometh to give birth ineffably to the preëternal Word in the cave. Dance, O world! And having heard this, with the angels and shepherds glorify the preëternal God, Who is to appear as a little babe.

*Ikos:* O truly awesome wonder past recounting! He Who giveth existence to all, in His goodness hath entered the womb of the holy Virgin, and cometh to be born in the cave, and to be laid in a manger. And His star is herald from on high to the magi who come to do Him homage with gifts, drawing from afar those who zealously follow the prophecy of Balaam, who said: “A star will proclaim beforehand the little babe, the preëternal God!”

And this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

O blessed John, lamp of Kronstadt, thou whose activity and preaching were continual, who didst offer up before the throne of the Most High lamentation over the sins of many, and who in the Spirit didst behold the bowing down of the heavens at the holy liturgy: Pray thou in behalf of our souls!

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Having shone forth from the Father, from the womb before the ages, in unconfused manner, the Word of God cometh forth from thy womb without seed, O all-pure one, in the fullness of time, raising up man who of old had grievously fallen, and leading him up to his pristine beauty, in that He is full of loving-kindness. Before His birth the hosts of the incorporeal ones go forth, and they mystically send down hymns of victory upon men, crying out: Glory to God Who hath given us peace, Who hath broken down the middle wall of enmity, as is His pleasure!

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ye mountains, hills and trees of the forest, ye rivers and sea, and everything that hath breath: leap up in gladness! Our salvation now draweth nigh! Jesus cometh to be born of a Virgin in the city of Bethlehem!

Take up thy psaltery, O Prophet David, and sing a hymn clearly, inspired by the Holy Spirit; for Christ God, the Lord of glory, Who shone forth without confusion from the womb of the Father before the morning star, is born of the Virgin.

How can the least and most lowly cave receive Thee born in the flesh, O Word? How is it that Thou Who clothest heaven with clouds art wrapped in swaddling clothes? How is it that Thou liest as a babe in a manger of dumb beasts?

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having a firm foundation in Christ, thou didst emulate Abraham of old in thy hospitality, receiving those who came to thee from all lands, and leading them to the Lord; and thus didst thou do what is pleasing unto God.

Desiring to make of thy heart a temple of God, it was thy wish to serve unceasingly in the house of God, adorning thy soul with the beauties of heaven.

Having quenched all the passions of the body with the dew of thy feats, thou didst kindle the light of dispassion; wherefore, thou wast shown also to be a child of the everlasting day, O blessed father.

*Theotokion:* The divine Ezekiel, O all-pure one, called thee prophetically the gate which was closed, through which He Who alone is preëternal hath passed without change, granting His peace.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her that kneweth not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, for we know none other than Thee. We call upon Thy name, for Thou art the God of the living and the dead.

May the clouds, rejoicing, let sweetness drop down like dew; for the Lord draweth nigh to be born as a babe of the pure Virgin in a cave.

Leap up now, O divine prophets of God; for He Who is anointed of a truth cometh to fulfill the preaching of your divine tongues, being born as a babe.

*Theotokion:* O Eden, which of old wast closed to me, open thyself now, beholding Christ as a babe in the flesh, born of the Virgin Maiden in the city of Bethlehem, as is His good pleasure.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Unceasingly serving thy Lord and ever emulating the labors of the apostles, O father, thou wast vouchsafed heavenly gifts.

Having slain the passionate pleasures of thy corruptible flesh, thou didst enliven thine incorruptible soul with piety and didst make of it a house of the divine Spirit.

Earnestly proclaiming the Gospel of Christ unto all, thou wast a daily communicant at the banquet of the Lord, making thyself and thy flock a living offering which was holy in God’s sight.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou gavest birth unto One of the Trinity, Who, for the sake of His loving-kindness, appeared on earth in two natures; Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He save our souls.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

To the astrologers heaven now pointeth, through a radiant star, to the King of heaven Who is born on earth for our sake in the city of David.

The Prophet David clearly holdeth forth and crieth aloud: Thou, O house of Ephratha, O Bethlehem, wherein God manifesteth Himself through the Virgin, leap up and dance!

*Theotokion:* In the cave of Bethlehem the Virgin manifestly giveth birth unto the Lord and Creator of all; and, wrapping Him as a man in swaddling clothes, she layeth Him now in a manger.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thou wast a fruitful olive tree in the house of thy Lord, O divinely manifest John, for the Lord imparted divine knowledge unto thee and strengthened thee in thine apostolic work.

Ye are the members of the body of Christ! Thus, with the Apostle Paul didst thou preach, and didst teach thy flock to love Christ alone, that all may be one.

Thy life is holy, thy discourse, O divinely wise one, was filled with the grace of God, and thy heart became a vessel of grace-filled prayer. Wherefore, with faith and love we honor thee.

*Theotokion:* The angelic nature marvelled at the ineffable wonder which took place within thee, O all-holy Virgin; how He Who is incorporeal and sustaineth all things took flesh of thee.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah, whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, came forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her that gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

O father John, namesake of grace, who wast chosen by God from childhood, who in thy youth miraculously received from Him the gift of learning, and in a dream wast most gloriously called to be a priest: Entreat Christ God, that we may all abide with thee in the kingdom of heaven.

*Ikos:* The Holy Spirit Who spake in the prophets and enlightened the whole world through the apostles, Who gave strength to the martyrs and made clear the Orthodox Faith through the holy hierarchs, poured forth His grace abundantly upon thee, O father John; for by thy discourse, by thy works and thy whole life thou didst proclaim the faith of Christ. Wherefore, the Lord hath summoned thee to His habitations; and as thou standest now before the throne of His glory, pray thou who all who honor thee may abide with thee in the kingdom of God.

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Pointing to the appearance of Christ in the flesh, Jeremiah cried out: The Lord hath appeared on earth incarnate; and, born of His Mother in Bethlehem, He hath found every way of knowledge.

Let us hearken to the sacred words: The Lord is born a babe for our sake, Whose government is upon His shoulder; and He is called the Angel of the Father’s great counsel, Christ the Prince of peace.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

By the providence of God wast thou shown to be a light of piety amid the heavy darkness of godlessness and unbelief, O father, calling upon all to cry out: Blessed art Thou in the churches of Thy glory, O Lord!

Man is in the image of God; and thou, O father John, wast a most splendid mirror of the love of God and a dwelling place of the Holy Trinity, Whom we sinners also glorify.

From the Lord didst thou receive the grace to heal the infirmities and passions of men; visit us also therewith always, that with thee we may all chant in oneness of mind: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, for ever!

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, save thy people, save those who are of the same blood as thee! Save us, O Mother of Life and of the whole human race, and, even though we are unworthy to call thee our mother, sanctify, make steadfast and save us by thy supplications.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

The children, raised together in piety, scorning the impious decree, feared not the threat of the fire; but, standing in the midst of the flame, they sang: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him ­supremely for all ages!

The Lord manifestly cometh to His own. Let us receive Him, that, born in the cave, He may make His own again those who have been denied access to the sweetness of paradise.

Behold, our summons arriveth! Let us zealously give utterance to joyous hymnody, and let us chant the hymns of the forefeast unto Him Who is born in the meanest of caves.

*Theotokion:* As the Lord hath sworn, so hath He already brought to pass, giving us His Virgin Mother from the seed of David, from whom He was born a babe in the city of Bethlehem, in manner past recounting.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Cleanse our hearts and thoughts by thy supplications, and show us forth to be fertile ground, that, girded about with virtue, we may cry out: Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast crowned with a wreath of the gifts of grace, contemplating heavenly wisdom and ever crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Triadicon Glory to Thee, O all-holy, life-creating Spirit, Who proceedest from the Father and ever restest in the Son! Glory to Thee, O Son of God, Who sanctifiest through the Holy Spirit, and strengthenest and makest us wise! Glory to Thee, O Father, Who art ever well pleased with us through the Holy Spirit! O indivisible Triune Unity, have mercy upon us!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to the salvation of the world, for through thee have we been taken up from earth to heaven! Rejoice, O blessed one, thou protection and dominion, rampart and foundation of those who chant: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for ever!

Katavasia of the forefeast—

The dew-bearing furnace presented an image of a supernatural wonder, for it did not consume the young men whom it had received, as the fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin’s womb wherein It had entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, let us magnify the Theotokos, the ever-flowing, life-receiving wellspring, the light-bearing lamp of grace, the animate temple, the all-pure tabernacle which is more spacious than heaven and earth.

Let us leap for joy with the patriarchs and all the righteous, and with the holy prophets, for the Lord Jesus our deliverance, enlightenment, life and salvation, is now born of the Virgin in the city of David.

Already the vestibule of the divine incarnation of the Word is manifestly opened unto all. Rejoice, ye heavens! Leap for joy, ye angels! And let the earth rejoice in spirit with men, shepherds and magi!

*Theotokion:* The Virgin, a noetic phial of alabaster, beareth Christ like an inexhaustible myrrh. And He cometh openly to be poured forth through the Spirit in the cave, that He may fill our souls with His fragrance.

Canon of the Righteous One

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Truly thou wast a light to the world, O holy father, for, having adorned thy soul with godly works, thou wast shown to be an eminent pastor of the Orthodox Church, being a model for the faithful in word and life; wherefore, we bless thee.

Keeping ever before thy mind the one Creator, through Whom and in Whom all things exist, with a pure heart and guileless soul thou didst labor for Him all thy life as for thy Lord; and thou wast in no wise in bondage to Mammon.

Princes praised thee and many people glorified thee; but, disdaining earthly glory, thou didst desire to be in the eternal mansions of God, there to glorify the Lord for ever.

*Theotokion:* He Who is preëternal descended into thy womb, O all-holy Virgin, and ineffably, in manner transcending comprehension and recounting, was born of thee, that He might renew Adam of old; wherefore, we ever magnify thee as the cause of our renewal.

Katavasia of the forefeast—

A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, and Whom praising, we magnify.

Exapostilarion—

Performing thy priestly ministry in the temple of the first-called of Christ, and zealously emulating his apostolic service of faith, thou wast a good laborer of the garden of Christ, and didst bring the faithful to the Lord like a bountiful harvest, ever proclaiming throughout thy whole life: My life is in Christ!

Glory..., Now and ever..., exapostilarion of the Forefeast—

O Bethlehem, prepare ye a new dwelling: a cave and the sacred manger! Ye assemblies of shepherds and wise men from the east: Go to it, guided by the radiance of the star, for the Virgin giveth birth therein to the all-Perfect One as a Babe.

At the Praises: 8 stichera; for of the forefeast, alphabetical, the composition of Romanus the Melodist, in Tone VI—

*Automelon:* Go before us, ye angelic hosts, and prepare the manger in Bethlehem; for the Word is born, Wisdom cometh forth, and the Church receiveth a salutation, to the joy of the Theotokos. O ye people, let us say: O our God, blessed art Thou Who comest! Glory be to Thee!

*Prosomoia:* Let the mountains rain down sweetness, for, lo! God cometh from Teman. Submit yourselves, ye nations! Rejoice, ye prophets! Leap for joy, ye patriarchs! Clap your hands, O men! Christ, the mighty and great Prince, is born! The King of the heavens cometh to earth!

The Creator is come, raising up mankind from the earth, making His royal image new again! Rejoice together, ye hosts on high, and chant! The middle wall of enmity is broken down! He is come Who accomplished this! For God becometh man, the King of Israel, Christ our God!

Come, O hard-hearted Israel, cast away the cloud which lieth over thy soul. Acknowledge the Creator Who is born in the cave. He is the expectation of the nations. He shall abolish thy festivals, for thou shalt not deign to cry out: Christ cometh forth, the King of Israel!

And 4 stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...”—

O most joyous tidings! The child John entreateth God, asking God’s mercy, that He enlighten his mind. He casteth himself down before the icon, confessing to God the sorrow of his heart. And, lo! the bindings fall from the eyes of the child’s mind, and the boy is illumined with the light of Christ, that he might do mighty things and teach many. *Twice*

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O abundance of wonders! O living splendor of love! Who will not marvel at thy beneficence and thy loving-kindness toward the destitute? In the countless number of thy miracles thou wast like the glorious and holy hierarch of Myra in Lycia. Wherefore, the cities and villages of the land of Russia, O righteous John, through thee beheld the light of Christ.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

As light and warmth cannot be separated from the sun, so in thee sanctity and learning, love and compassion were present, O most sacred John, who wast given by God to the people. Wherefore, O pastor, warm us and enlighten us; be thou like the sun unto our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VII—

“Bowing down before the holy icons, I glorify Christ, God incarnate, the image of the glory of the Father. I confess the Father, Who begat the Son without beginning. I glorify the divine likeness of men, who are temples of the Holy Spirit. And beholding the image of the Cross, I sense the power of the Cross.” Behold, this is thy theology, O holy father, wherein thou didst emulate the great teachers of the Church, honoring the iconographic images to the glory of their prototypes.

Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone II, Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephratha...”—

Come, ye earthborn, and together let us unceasingly hymn the Virgin, Mary the Theotokos, from whom Christ is born.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the forefeast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

The righteous man shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Reading from the First Epistle General of John \(4:7-11\).

Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

His heart is ready to hope in the Lord.

*Stichos:* A good man is he that is compassionate and lendeth.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. Luke §26 \(6:31-36\).

The Lord said: As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

*If it be desired, the service of the holy Hieromartyr Ignatius the God-bearer, to whom Christ pointed and said: “If ye be not as this child, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heave,” may be combined with those of the forefeast of the nativity of Christ and the commemoration of St. John of Kronstadt, as follows:*

*On “Lord, I have cried…”, 10 stichera: 3 of the forefeast, 3 of the hieromartyr, and 4 of St. John. Readings from the service of St. John. At Litia, the stichera of St. John. On the Aposticha, the stichera of St. John; Glory…, doxasticon of the hieromartyr; Now & ever…, of the forefeast. At the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of St. John, twice; and that of the forefeast, once.*

*At Matins, on “God is the Lord…”, troparion of the forefeast, once; that of the hieromartyr, once; Glory…, that of St. John; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast.*

*Canons of the forefeast, the hieromartyr, and St. John. Katavasiae: Christ is born…. Exapostilaria of the hieromartyr, St. John; Glory…, of the hieromartyr; Now & ever…, of the forefeast.*

*Great Doxology. Troparion of St. John; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the forefeast.*

*At Liturgy: On the Beatitudes: 4 troparia of the forefeast, and 4 of St. John.*

An Akathist Hymn in honor of St. John is available from the Press as \#S175.

