The 21st Day Of The Month Of December

Forefeast Of The Nativity Of Christ

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Juliana Of Nicomedia

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Peter of Moscow\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

“He is our God, and none other shall take His place!” the prophet exclaimed in the Spirit; “He hath found every path of knowledge, and thereby hath made Himself like unto men, arraying Himself in flesh; for He cometh to be born of the divine Maiden and Virgin. He Who is unapproachable in essence becometh accessible to me.”

Thy womb, O most immaculate Theotokos, is shown to be a heap of flour, ineffably containing the uncultivated Wheat in manner past understanding and recounting. Thou givest birth in the cave of Bethlehem to Him Who will nurture all creation with divine understanding and grace, and deliver mankind from soul-destroying famine.

The unblemished heifer, bearing the fatted Calf within her womb, cometh to the holy cave to give birth to Him in all-glorious manner, to wrap Him as a man in swaddling-bands, and to lay Him in a manger as a babe. Celebrate the forefeast, O creation, joyfully magnifying Him Who hath wrought such glorious things on earth.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Having dyed for thyself a robe of salvation in the stain of thy blood, O most lauded one, and illumined thyself in spirit, thou didst betroth thyself to the immortal King Who preserveth thee incorrupt and undefiled unto the ages of ages, as a virgin all-adorned and unsullied in the mansions of heaven.

Having received wounds and been cast into the fire, having endured the rending of thy flesh, and valiantly borne the boiling cauldron, thou wast not vanquished in resolve, and didst not sacrifice to graven images; but, bowing thy neck unto God, thou didst ascend to the heavens as a crown-bearer through martyrdom by the sword.

Adorned with drops of thy blood, thou wast most manifestly resplendent, like the sun, O most lauded martyr Juliana, and didst dispel the gloom of ungodliness by grace; and thou hast illumined the faithful who honor thy valiant struggles and thy splendid and radiant memory, which is salvific for all.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in Tone VI—

Hold festival, O Sion! Be glad, O Jerusalem! O city of Christ God, receive the Creator, Who is contained by the cave and the manger! Open thy gates unto me, that, entering through them, I may see Him Who holdeth creation in His hand wrapped as a babe in swaddling-bands, Whom the angels hymn with unceasing songs: the Lord, the Bestower of life, Who saveth our race.

At the aposticha, these stichera of the forefeast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

The predictions of all the prophets are now fulfilled; for Christ is born of the pure divine Maiden in the city of Bethlehem.

*Stichos:* God shall come forth out of Thæman, and the Holy One out of a mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.

O honored Bethlehem, thou glory, joy and boast of mortal men, divine metropolis: receive thy Creator.

*Stichos:* O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; O Lord, I considered Thy works, and I was amazed.

The Word of the Father, by Whom all things came into being, is seen as a single Hypostasis in two natures, dispassionately and unchangeably.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI—

O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, from whence hast thou come? Who gave birth to thee? Who was thy mother? How is it thou bearest the Creator in thine arms? How is it that thy womb hath not experienced corruption? O the all-glorious and awesome mysteries wrought in thee, which we see performed on earth, O most holy one! On earth we prepare for thee thy due as is meet: the cave; and from the heavens we ask that a star be given. The magi come from the lands of the East to those of the West, to behold the salvation of men wrapped in swaddling-bands in the manger.

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

Thy martyr Juliana, O Christ, crieth out with a loud voice: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I suffer; I am crucified and buried in Thy baptism; I suffer for Thy sake, that I may live with Thee. Accept me as an unblemished sacrifice, who offer myself to Thee with love!” Through her supplications save our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

Now & ever…: troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Make ready, O Bethlehem! Open unto all, O Eden! Adorn thyself, O Ephratha! For the Tree of life hath blossomed forth from the Virgin in the cave. Her womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, wherein lieth a divine garden, eating from whence we live, not dying like Adam. Christ is born to raise up His image which before was fallen.

At Compline

We chant a triodion, the irmos of each ode of which we chant twice, the troparia repeated to make up six in number. After each ode both choirs together chant the irmos of the ode.

Triodion, the acrostic whereof is: “To the fourth”, in Tone II—

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my soul doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

In vain doth the vile and murderous company assemble at the behest of Herod, to slay Christ our newborn Lord. To Him do we chant: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

The cruel counsel of Herod, who in soul is opposed to God, is set at nought, for he desired to slay Christ the Master with the infants. To Him do we chant: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

*Lord, have mercy! Thrice Glory…, Now & ever…—*

Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Today the Virgin cometh to give birth ineffably to the preëternal Word in the cave. Dance, O world! And having heard this, with the angels and shepherds glorify the preëternal God, Who is to appear as a little babe.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Because the words of the tyrant prevailed, the furnace was once heated sevenfold, but therein the children were not consumed, trampling the edict of the king underfoot; and they cried aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Shedding tears like myrrh for Christ Who is born for our sake, therewith we wash away our defilements, approaching the All-pure one in purity, and crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With tears of compunction let us avoid tears for the coming dread torments, following the steps of Christ Who is placed in swaddling-bands as a babe, and crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Knowing that deliverance would be wrought in sanctity from within our midst, and having washed ourselves beforehand for Christ in a fountain of tears, O ye faithful, let us approach Him Who in the flesh is born in the cave, crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Come ye, and with pure souls and undefiled lips let us magnify the undefiled and all-pure Mother of Emmanuel, offering supplication unto Him Who was born of her, saying: Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!

Let there be no foolish person, no wicked model of jealousy, among those who now offer to God pleasing gifts instead of myrrh, gold and frankincense—the sweet fragrance of the virtues, and who chant unto Christ Who is born: Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!

Herod said to the wise magi when they arrived: “Go and search for the King Who is now born, and when ye have found Him, tell me,” for the cruel one harbored murder in his vile and murderous heart. Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!

O blind and vile murderer, O most audacious one, whereby thou didst earn oblivion, for no one lifteth his hands to slay God! Aflame with rage, thou dost savagely slaughter the infants, O Herod. Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the forefeast, twice; Glory…, that of the martyr; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The noble Joseph…”—

Our unapproachable God, of His own will becoming approachable in His loving-kindness, cometh to be born as a man in the flesh of the Virgin Maiden in Bethlehem. Let us earnestly hasten to receive him, crying out with fear: Glory to Thee, O Lord!

Glory…, Now & ever…: another sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

He Who bowed down the heavens and made His abode within the Virgin cometh in the flesh, to be born in the cave of Bethlehem as was written, and to be seen as a babe, imparting life to babes in the womb. Wherefore, rejoicing, let us now greet Him with uprightness of heart.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who is equally unoriginate…”—

O Bethlehem, prepare thyself to greet the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God; for, lo! she cometh to thee, bearing the infant Christ, Who is ever equally unoriginate with the Father and the Spirit. She will give birth to Him in the cave, and after giving birth will be shown to be a virgin still.

Glory…, Now & ever…: another sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

An all-glorious miracle is seen today! For our Savior now hasteneth to be born in the flesh of the Virgin for our sake, in the cave. The magi pay homage to Him with gifts as to a King, and the shepherds and angels glorify Him. And with them we also cry aloud: Glory to Him Who became man for our sake!

Canon of the forefeast, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the martyr, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the \[Greek\] alphabet, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Rejoice, O heaven, and be glad, O earth! For our God, having taken on flesh, is born of the Virgin Maiden and is wrapped in swaddling-bands; and He breaketh the bonds of our transgressions, in that He is compassionate. The pure Queen giveth birth in manner past understanding to the King of all Who openeth the kingdom on high to the faithful and utterly removeth the sin which ever accursedly reigneth within us.

The writings of the prophets attain their end; for, lo! Christ Whom they proclaimed beforehand is revealed, incarnate, in the city of Bethlehem. Let us hasten now to celebrate the forefeast of His nativity today with uprightness of mind.

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “May God confer the grace to hymn thee, O martyr”, the composition of Joseph, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Manifestly resplendent with the radiance of martyrdom, thou dancest in God, deified in sanctity, O most lauded one, and bestowest illumination upon those who hymn thee by thy supplications.

Thou wast wounded by the most sweet love of Christ, O most lauded one, and, having put away the carnal passions and thy corruptible bridegroom, thou didst betroth thyself to Him Who created thee, O immaculate and pure virgin.

God, the Creator of all, illumining thy mind with beauties of manifest brilliance, hath counted thee worthy to join the choir of virgins in the mansions of heaven, O divinely wise martyr.

*Theotokion:* The Virgin cometh to give birth in the cave to the Creator of nature Who hath ineffably and supernaturally taken flesh from her hypostatically, that He might deify mankind.

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Daniel beheld Thee, O Word, as the Stone cut from the mountain of the Virgin, which broke the temples of the idols in pieces by Thy might. Wherefore, we glorify Thee with fear.

Guided to Thee by the star, O Christ, Thou King of all, the magi from the East bring gifts—myrrh, gold and frankincense—marvelling at Thy condescension.

The unploughed field beareth the life-bearing Grain; Mary cometh to give birth in the city of Bethlehem to Him Who feedeth the souls of all who cry: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Thou didst make thy soul the all-holy temple of God, O glorious one, ever continuing in the temples of God with hymnody and supplication.

Desiring to obtain the greatest of gifts, O most honored one, thou didst endure the pangs of the flesh as in another body.

With the drops of thy blood thou didst extinguish the fire and didst water the thoughts of the faithful, O Juliana.

*Theotokion:* Delivering men, the Deliverer is born in Bethlehem of the pure one, being wrapped as a babe in swaddling-bands.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Rendered wholly pure by the beauties of virginity, and having now been crowned with wreaths of martyrdom, O virgin Juliana, thou grantest healing and salvation unto those in need and affliction who approach thy shrine; for Christ poureth forth divine grace and life everlasting.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Having come to love the Bridegroom, Creator and God, thou didst forsake thy corruptible bridegroom, O honored martyr, and, rejoicing, thou didst endure torments, laceration and fiery torture. Wherefore, thou hast entered into the divine bridal-chamber wearing a crown, asking forgiveness of transgressions for all.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the forefeast, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

Be ye filled with joy, O ye ends of the earth; for the Theotokos draweth nigh to give birth to the King of all. O the ineffable mystery! The Unoriginate One hath a beginning! The Incorporeal One becometh incarnate! The cave receiveth Him Who holdeth all things! Rejoice, O Bethlehem, and dance, O creation, on this day of His forefeast!

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The holy phial of precious sanctity cometh to pour forth in the city of Bethlehem Him Who imparteth sanctity unto all of us who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

O divinely eloquent Isaiah, beholding the fulfillment in matter of thine honored prophesies, rejoice and dance! For without seed the Virgin hath given birth in the flesh to the Uncontainable One in the cave of Bethlehem.

Jesus is born in the flesh; the Timeless One is seen as an infant in time, and by His ineffable abasement deifieth me who have become poor through corrupting disobedience.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having acquired a mind outstretched toward the Lord of all, stretched in the flesh and cruelly wounded thou didst in nowise deny Him, O goodly virgin Juliana.

The love of the Master succeeded in casting the flesh into darkness, O most lauded martyr; wherefore, thou didst despise riches, thy bridegroom and multifarious tortures.

Rending thee, the unblemished ewe-lamb, with wounds, like jackals, O martyr, the torturers rendered thee a divine lamb of God, a sacrifice for God unblemished and whole.

*Theotokion:* Beholding thy virginity sealed after birthgiving, O Theotokos, and held fast by awe, thou didst cry aloud: “O my Child, how is it that I wrap thee now with swaddling bands, Who girdest the sea with sand?”

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

God Emmanuel is born of the Virgin, and, laid in a manger, of His own will He worketh our restoration. Wherefore, we piously celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.

O Thou Who art the Word Who is without beginning, equal in essence with the Father, having been laid in a manger of dumb beasts thou hast released from irrationality us who piously celebrate the forefeast of Thy nativity.

Blessed was the root of Jesse which produced the pure one who beareth the divine Flower, Christ the Lord. And, rejoicing, we celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With the outpourings of thy blood unjustly shed thou hast dried up the stream of wicked ungodliness, O martyr, and thou hast quenched the fire of falsehood.

Thou didst offer thyself wholly unto God, having dyed the purple robe of thy virginity most splendidly with the dye of thy blood.

Wounded in soul by Thy beauty, O Master, the virgin passed over visible beauties, splendid in her suffering.

*Theotokion:* A new wonder! The all-pure Virgin cometh to the cave of Bethlehem to give birth to God Who had become man.

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Having been born for us as a little babe on earth, O Thou Who shone forth ineffably from the Father before time began, free all from the ancient disobedience, in that Thou art compassionate.

Strange and all-glorious things were heard in the city of Bethlehem when Thou wast born, O unoriginate Word; for with the angels shepherds offered up hymnody to Thee as Master.

The star of righteousness ineffably proclaimeth to the magi the Sun Who hath been born; and, rejoicing, we now celebrate the forefeast of His honored nativity.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Wounded by divine desire, thou didst cry aloud: “I go forth to attain Christ Who is comely in beauty! Wherefore, I endure tortures, rejoicing with unwavering resolve!”

The evil tyrant commanded that the ewe-lamb of the Lord, whose mind was set on Christ, be mercilessly stretched out and broken with iron rods.

Thou didst rise early unto Christ, the never-setting Sun, O divinely wise one, and with His splendors didst illumine thy soul and heart; and thou hast been translated to everlasting light.

*Theotokion:* The Creator Who hath wrapped the sea in mist of His own will is born of the Virgin Maiden; He Who delivereth the world deigneth to be wrapped in swaddling-bands as an infant.

Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Beholding Him Who holdeth the whole world in His hands wrapped in swaddling-bands in Bethlehem, let us offer up hymns of the forefeast to her who gave birth to Him; for she rejoiceth maternally, holding the Son of God at her bosom.

*Ikos:* Holding the Son of God in her arms, and kissing Him with maternal tenderness, the Virgin exclaimed: “I knew not seed in conceiving, and I have not undergone corruption in giving birth! I am as pure now, after giving birth, as I was before! Wherefore, I proclaim Thy surpassing loving-kindness, O my Child, and the unapproachable majesty which Thou hast shown forth upon me! Therefore, I rejoice, holding the Son of God at my bosom!”

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

How can a cave contain Thee, the Uncontainable One, Who cometh to be born for our sake? How can the Virgin give suck to Thee, Who art the Nourisher of all, O compassionate Jesus?

Following the words of the magus Balaam, the magi hastened to pay homage to Christ with gifts, perceiving that He is the One Who reigneth over all creatures.

O human nature, devoid of any of the virtues, rejoice and dance! For Christ cometh to be born in the flesh of the Virgin, that He might show thee to be right fruitful in good works.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Without pity the judge mindlessly cast thee into the heated cauldron, O martyr; but by an angel the Lord preserved thee unharmed, for thou didst worship Him.

Undaunted, O most honored martyr, with manly mind thou didst enter the fire, sensing only coolness, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou didst offer thy Bridegroom, like a wreath, the people who had come to believe on Him, and with thy radiant miracles thou didst cut through the gloom of falsehood.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Virgin Mother, thou dwelling-place of the Uncontainable One, desiring for our sake to give birth in a cave, O all-pure one, to Him Who guideth all creation by His hand as a mortal man.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

In Thine ineffable loving-kindness, to save me who through my great disobedience have become a den of thieves, O Christ, it was Thy will to be born in a cave of the pure Virgin.

Signing a writ of complete remission for me, Thou, the Author of creation, didst register Thyself with servants in accordance with the edict of Cæsar. O Master, I hymn the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness!

O radiant palace of the Master, how is it that thou hast entered the least of caves to give birth to the Lord and King Who became incarnate for our sake, O most holy Virgin Bride of God?

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having thine eyes and mind lifted up to God Who is able to save, by the grace of the divine Spirit thou didst extinguish the boiling of the cauldron, O martyr, chanting with faith the hymn of the children: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Obeying the words of the wicked tyrant, the vain-minded ones who were worthy of fire cast thee alive into the fire, O martyr; yet, bedewed by the love of thy Bridegroom, thou wast not consumed by the fire, honoring Him, O God-bearer.

Thou didst stand before the tribunal, professing Christ to be the immortal God Who hath endured crucifixion and slain falsehood, and granteth immortal life to the faithful who cry: Hymn the Lord, all ye works!

*Theotokion:* Setting the clouds for His ascent, through the cloud of the Virgin the Lord cometh to be born for us, that He might dispel the dark cloud of sin from the souls of us who cry out to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

O ye faithful, let us dance, leap up and cry out together: The Salvation of all cometh! The Lord draweth nigh to be born, that He might save those who with godly wisdom celebrate His nativity!

Take up thy psaltery and harp, O holy David, and chant in hymnody: O house of Ephratha, be glad! For He Whom the Father begat from within Himself is all-radiantly born in thee, incarnate of the Virgin!

Like a downpour, like a mighty rain-fall hath the Master descended into thy womb, O Virgin Mother and Theotokos, and He hath watered lands hardened by dark ungodliness and dried up the seas of falsehood.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

The angels marvelled at the struggles which the God-bearing Juliana undertook for the Faith: how in her womanly nature she put to shame him who had brought death to our first mother in paradise.

As a passion-bearer all-adorned and a most excellent virgin thou hast lawfully received the crown of righteousness, having in thy flesh trampled the incorporeal foe underfoot and emerged triumphant.

We honor thee, the noetic swallow, the incorrupt turtle-dove and dove, whose wings were gilded by thy witness, and who soared aloft and found rest in God.

Thou didst blossom forth in the vales of martyrdom like a lily, O passion-bearer Juliana, and in virginity thou wast as fragrant as a rose, becoming divine perfume for thy comely Bridegroom.

*Theotokion:* Bearing Him Who upholdeth all things, the Virgin cometh to Bethlehem to give birth to Him, and to lay in a manger, as a babe, Him Who doth excellently accomplish the restoration of men.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “He hath visited us…”—

Come, O ye faithful, let us all offer up hymns of the forefeast of the nativity! Christ already cometh to be born in Bethlehem, that He might save the world, in that He alone loveth mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever…: another exapostilarion—

O Bethlehem, land of Judah, adorn thy gates! For already the Virgin Theotokos approacheth to give birth within thee, in a cave and a manger, to my Lord and God.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angelic hosts…”—

The creative Wisdom now cometh forth! The clouds of prophecy are parted! Grace doth flourish, and Truth hath shone forth! The shadows of indistinct images cease to be! The gates of Eden have opened! Dance thou, O Adam! God our Creator hath of His own will taken on form!

Fulfilling the sayings and visions of the prophets, the Word is born in the flesh, taketh on coarse matter and, having been born, lieth in a manger of dumb beasts. Lo! the extreme condescension! Behold the awesome dispensation, for which cause we chant: Christ, the King of Israel, hath now arrived!

Behold, in manner past understanding and recounting, the pure one giveth birth to the Son of God Whom the prophets of old proclaimed, foreseeing through the Holy Spirit, Who preserveth her undefiled, and releaseth Adam from sin. O ye people, let us say: Christ our King hath now arrived in the flesh!

Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou didst reveal Thyself as man, and held in the arms of the Virgin, by a star Thou didst summon the magi from Persia, who worshipped Thee as King and God. Thou dost destroy the ungodly princes of the heathen with the spirit of Thy lips, and dost shepherd the people whom Thou hast brought into existence.

Glory…, in the same tone & melody—

The Word Who is consubstantial with the Father, receiving human form from the precious blood of the Virgin, taketh form and groweth with the passing of time; and He is born in the cave. Great is the awesomeness! The angels chant, and man clap their hands: Christ, the King of Israel, cometh forth!

Now & ever…, in the same tone & melody—

The prophecies of Balaam the magus receive their fulfillment; for those who were filled with Persian miracles, illumined with the brilliance of the unusual star by Christ Who was incarnate in Bethlehem, the never-setting Sun, indicate by their bestowal of gifts God the King, Who of His own will became a mortal man.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

The star shineth forth, signalling beforehand Him Who is born in the cave. O ye shepherds and angels, ye magi with gifts, make haste to come forth!

*Stichos:* God shall come forth out of Thæman, and the Holy One out of a mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.

That He might fulfill the predictions of the prophets, the Lord is born in Bethlehem. And He openeth Eden unto the descendents of Adam.

*Stichos:* O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; O Lord, I considered Thy works, and I was amazed.

O Bethlehem, with myrrh do thou anoint the holy manger; for the Master will put forth the rays of His divinity.

Glory…, Now & ever…, In the same melody:

Come, O ye mortals, and let us together unceasingly hymn Mary, the Virgin Theotokos, from whom Christ is born!

