The 1st Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Jeremiah

*\(for this day we also provide services in honor of St. Tamara of Georgia and SS Euthymius, Ignatius & Acacius\)*
{{text_align=center}}

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though at the tribunal…”—

O Lord, Thou didst know the glorious Jeremiah even before he was created, and Thou didst sanctify the prophet before his birth, and from infancy, as one who knew freedom of understanding beforehand. Through his supplications save our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

O Lord, even though the holy Jeremiah was cast into a cesspool, yet did he noetically acquire a beautiful sweet fragrance, for he dwelleth in the mansions of paradise. By his supplications preserve us all, in that Thou art our Benefactor.

O Lord, the prophet, shining with Thine all-radiant beams, was seen even by his opponents to be blessed and honorable; for the adversary was put to shame by his virtues; and he foresaw the things of the future as though they were present ascents.

Glory…, Now & ever…: from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

O Bride of God, regard thou the sighing of my contrite heart; accept the lifting up of my hands, O pure Virgin Mary, in that thou lovest mankind, and reject it not, O most immaculate one, that I may hymn and magnify thee who hast magnified our race.

Stavrotheotokion—

Standing at the foot of Thy Cross, the all-immaculate one cried aloud: “O my Son, unoriginate Word of the Father, Who art equally enthroned with the Spirit, how is it that Thou hast stretched out Thine all-pure hands upon the Tree? How hast Thou impoverished Thyself so greatly, O All-good One?”

Troparion, in Tone II—

Celebrating the memory of Thy prophet Jeremiah, O Lord, through him do we entreat Thee: Save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

Canon of the prophet, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Known before thou was created, thou wast sanctified from thy mother’s womb, and wast anointed a prophet to the nations, crying out: Let us chant to our Deliverer and God!

He Who before all had understanding, foreseeing the movements of thy mind, O divinely manifest Jeremiah, ordained thee an instructor for the people.

Having cleansed the sight of thy thought from carnal defilements, O wise one, thou didst show thyself to be a witness to the Truth beloved of thy Creator.

*Theotokion:* Having, in manner transcending nature, given birth to the Word of the Father, Who made His abode in thee on earth, O Virgin Theotokos, thou hast been shown to be the Mistress of all creatures.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Having hallowed Thy prophet before his birth, O Master, Thou didst send him as a guide for those who are lost.

The grace of the Spirit, which abode in thy lips, shone forth upon those in darkness like an all-radiant beacon.

Unable to bear the sweet fragrance of thy myrrh, the vile assembly of Israel imprisoned thee in a pit.

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O all-pure one, was the unoriginate Son of God well pleased to dwell among men.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Thou didst rise from the tomb…”—

Thou didst incline thine ear unto God, that thou mightest hear His words, O divinely eloquent prophet. Wherefore, unto all thou didst make plain things which had not yet occurred, as though they had already happened; and with lamentations for thy people, who had withdrawn far away from the Lord, thou didst weep. And now, in the heavens, thou prayest that we be saved.

Glory, Now & ever: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion—

I have fallen into the abyss of grievous despondency, and have fallen into perplexity because of the multitude of my wicked and impure deeds, and am now stuck fast in despair. O Mistress Theotokos, by thy compassion save me, in that thou art the help and salvific cleansing of sinners.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “What is this strange and unexpected sight? How is the Life of all condemned to death like a mortal man? Yet arise from the dead on the third day, O Word, as Thou hast said, that, rejoicing, I may glorify Thee!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

The all-radiant effulgence of the all-holy and divine Spirit, which illumined thy heart, hath made thee the enlightenment of those in darkness.

As thou art the prophet most sympathetic to us of all the prophets, O most blessed God-pleaser, grant mercy unto me who despair of my manifold transgressions.

As a mediator of manifest and divine splendor, by thy mediation still thou the tempest of my greatly tumultuous life.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, entreat the God to Whom thou gavest birth, that, by thy supplications, He may grant us forgiveness of our offenses.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst send Thy prophet, the sanctified Jeremiah, like lightning, proclaiming Thee, the Light, to those in darkness, O Christ.

In His foreknowledge, O Jeremiah, thy Master showed thee to be a choice arrow stored in his quiver for the fitting occasion.

Thy spiritual ears purified, O glorious prophet, thou wast counted worthy to hear the Spirit conversing with thee.

*Theotokion:* Great and awesome is the mystery of the Virgin! For as a mother she nourished God Who, in His loving-kindness, appeared on earth to men.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The abyss of my sins and the tempest of my transgressions discomfit me and thrust me down into the depths of violent despondency; but stretch forth Thy mighty arm unto me, as Thou didst to Peter, and save my, O my Guide.

Thou didst draw down enlightenment and grace in abundance, O God-bearer, spiritually enlarging the mouth of thy soul; and filled therewith, O prophet, thou hast bestowed them freely upon all who desire effulgence.

Gazing upon the sea of this world raging with the threefold billows of temptations, thou didst desire the outermost courts and a well-spring pouring forth a river of tears to lament the apostasy of thy people.

As a mystery thou didst recount beforehand the death of the Deliverer, O divinely eloquent one, for the iniquitous assembly of the Jews lifted Christ up upon the Tree like a lamb, the Author of life, the Benefactor of all creation.

*Theotokion:* The Word Who was begotten incorporeally of the Father before time began, O pure one, was born of thee in the flesh, within time; and we all live in His shadow, as Jeremiah prophesied of old.

Kontakion, In Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Having cleansed thy radiant heart with the Spirit, O glorious Jeremiah, great prophet and martyr, thou didst receive from on high the gift of prophecy and didst cry aloud among the lands: “Behold our God! There is none other to compare with Him, Who hath appeared, incarnate, on the earth!”

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Beholding the things foretold by thee no longer in expectation, but fulfilled in deed, O prophet, thou criest: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou wast shown to be the divine harp struck by the hand of the Comforter, producing heavenly sounds and singing: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

While thou didst write down lamentations, O prophet, yet was thy divine gladness not darkened, wherein thou didst manifestly delight from infancy, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* It was Thy good pleasure to enter the womb of the Virgin, desiring to save men, O Thou Who didst manifestly teach the prophets to perform miracles. Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

In gladness thou hast ascended to the heavens, O divinely inspired Jeremiah, and with the incorporeal ones thou standest before the throne of the King of all, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

As a sacred preacher of piety, O all-praised Jeremiah, thou didst denounce the weakness of impiety, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Shining with the light of divine splendor, which thou receivest like a most lustrous mirror, thou dost emit radiance upon those who love it, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* The Bestower of life received my nature from thee and cleansed it of its former defilement, O Mother of God. To Him do we sing: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Having united thyself to the all-pure light of the splendor of the Godhead, O blessed and glorious one, thou didst manifestly acquire the manifestations thereof on earth.

Having attained unto the well-spring of incorruption and the effulgence thereof, O divinely inspired one, thou didst manifestly receive the end thou didst desire.

Delighting now in radiant splendor, O blessed Jeremiah, grant that it may illumine all who hymn thy memory.

*Theotokion:* O haven of salvation, we who believe in and acknowledge thine all-pure birthgiving entreat thee, that we may be delivered from misfortunes.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.

*Stichos:* The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies the footstool of thy feet.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §156

\[I Cor 14:20-25\]

Brethren: Be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men. In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them which believe. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad? But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

Alleluia, in Tone V—

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among them that call upon His name.

*Stichos:* A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart.

Gospel according to Luke, §14 \[4:22-30\]

At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of His mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son? And He said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country. And He said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; But unto none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, And rose up, and thrust Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast Him down headlong. But He, passing through the midst of them, went His way.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

