Also on The 1st Day of the Month of May

the Holy Martyred Monks Euphemius, Ignatius & Acacius

AT Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, In Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O most lauded martyrs who on this day lifted up your voice in the arena, ye proclaim Christ, Who is both God and man; and, having trampled the falsehood of the infidels and their symbols underfoot, ye crush the head of the demon and give joy to the faithful, magnifying the Savior with faith.

The multitude of the demons hath been filled with terror, and Satan, the lying serpent, hath been cast down; for, lifting high the Cross of the Lord amid the arena, O glorious ones, and burning with the divine love of Christ, O radiant ones, steadfast of soul ye hastened unto death and have been reckoned among the assemblies of the martyrs.

O Euphemius, martyr of Christ, taking with thee Ignatius, thy true friend and fellow athlete, together with Acacius and Onuphrius, the emulators of thy suffering, fervently beseech the Lord, that we may escape the harmful snares of the cruel adversary.

O ye martyrs three in number, who mightily contended against the most cruel judges and endured most terrible forms of tortures, ye have obtained the kingdom on high; wherefore, offer supplication, that peace and great mercy be granted to our souls.

Glory…, in the same tone—

Blessed are ye, O glorious new-martyrs, equal in number to the Trinity, for ye delight in good things! For having in a short time finished the course of your martyrdom, ye have received everlasting gladness, rejoicing with the venerable and joining the train of the martyrs. Wherefore, delighting unceasingly in divine beauty, be ye ever mindful to make entreaty to the Lord in our behalf, that we also may obtain this gladness, O most blessed ones.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Come, all ye multitude of Christian peoples, and with venerable hymns let us honor the new martyrs whom Christ hath glorified.

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

O Euphemius, with the godly Acacius thou hast been shown to be the boast of ascetics, adornment of the martyrs and our tireless advocate.

*Stichos:* In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

O Ignatius, dying by strangulation thou hast become the strangulation of the ungodly and a new martyr of Christ. Him do thou entreat.

Glory…, in the same tone & melody—

O thrice-radiant Light— Father, Son and Holy Spirit,— at the right acceptable supplications of Thy new martyrs, have mercy upon Thy world.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same melody—

O Mother of Jesus, Mary, Bride of God, with the new athletes entreat the Creator in our behalf, we pray.

Troparion, in Tone I—

Equal in number with the uncreated Trinity, O wise ones, with the choirs of angels and the ranks of martyrs ye stand, rejoicing, before the throne of the Godhead; wherefore, receiving effulgence from thence through communion, ye impart to the faithful a well-spring of healings and divine enlightenment. O Euphemius, martyr of Christ, wise Ignatius and godly Acacius, pray ye ever in our behalf.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

When Gabriel announced to thee, Rejoice! O Virgin, the Master of all became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, at His cry, as the righteous David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, having borne thy Creator. Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who came forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 5 for the martyred monks, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Celebrating today the new and joyous feast of Thy new martyrs in this time of spring, O Christ Who lovest mankind, with faith we offer their struggles unto Thee as most fragrant flowers, as right melodious larks graciously hymning Thy divinity and filling the hearts of the Orthodox with joy. *Twice*

Today the material spring hath gladdened material creation, while the resurrection of Christ, the noetic spring, hath shone forth and, spiritually restoring the nature of men, noetically spreadeth gladness. And now a threefold springtime hath come: the celebration of the three athletes imparteth threefold delight to the senses of our souls and bodies.

O beauteous and goodly youths, ye blessed new martyrs, ye stand before Christ, wearing the forms of your tortures like ornaments of kingship, the wounds of your pure flesh like precious stones, the outpouring of your blood like a robe of purple, and bearing the Cross with glory like a scepter; and ye rejoice with the angels.

O glorious new martyrs equal in number with the Trinity, unvanquished and most steadfast athletes, truly divine Euphemius, Ignatius and steadfast Acacius, who have now founded a new festival: Cease ye never to offer supplications for us unto the Master of all, O right wondrous ones.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Today three radiant and most beautiful suns have shone forth in the firmament of the Faith: the all-radiant trinity of the wise new martyrs of Christ! Assembling in their honored temple, O ye faithful, let us crown them with hymns of spring, saying: Rejoice, O ye three most glorious athletes, ye newly erected fortresses and most renowned foundations of the Orthodox Faith! Rejoice, O great Euphemius, who explained the divinity of Christ before the infidels and wisely refuted the demonic falsehood of the Moslems, and who, going before the Passion of the Lord with palm-fronds and branches, didst show thyself to be a victorious athlete, and didst open the most splendid contest of martyrdom to the three fellow athletes who came after thee! Rejoice, O glorious Ignatius, who didst emulate the true sufferings of Christ and with the noose of thy hanging didst strangle the devil! Rejoice, O most honored Acacius, who in the outpouring of thy blood didst dye for thyself a royal robe of purple, wherein thou standest before the throne of the Godhead! O ye three true habitations of the unconfused Trinity, cease ye never to pray to the Lord in our behalf.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings—

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, these stichera—

*In Tone I:* O wondrous ones, ye have been shown to be the boast of holiness and the glory of martyrdom; for, having taken up the Cross of Christ as ascetics, ye passed through the most glorious contest of martyrdom, and having gloriously accomplished the cleansing of yourselves through as martyrs, ye stand, purified, before the pure throne of Christ. O most glorious crowned ones, ye three new martyrs—great Euphemius, Ignatius steadfast of mind and most radiant Acacius,—rejoicing with the martyrs and the venerable ones, pray ye to the Lord in our behalf.

*In Tone II:* Like springtime of gladness hath the thrice radiant festival of the new martyrs shone forth today! Come, therefore, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us celebrate with splendor, spiritually delighting in their struggles and battles for Christ: for, having constrained their nature, they surpassed all in holiness; and, consumed by the love of the Lord, they hastened to martyrdom of their own will; and, having joyfully drained the glorious cup of death, they have received the crown of victory, as most glorious victors and champions. Yea, O Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, joining chorus now with the angels in the heavens in the never-ceasing dance, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone V—

Sing unto the Lord a new song! Chant unto Him, all the earth! For His three new martyrs Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, setting forth a new feast, with love of wisdom receive those who love them and have come together, and, setting before them an immaterial banquet, they offer them their struggles for Christ like divers foodstuffs. Come ye, therefore, and, tasting thereof noetically, let us rejoice in spirit and say unto Christ the Master with all our heart: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord Who hast shown these who loved Thee to be vanquishers of sin and hast set upon them crowns of glory! Wherefore, vouchsafe that we also may emulate their virtues and receive an equal glory. O greatly merciful Lord, glory be to Thee!

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

At the aposticha, these stichera, In Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, O trinity of new martyrs, champions of the uncreated Trinity, who as divine beacons have illumined the whole world with the rays of your torments, and now, receiving from us hymnody of praise, offering supplications to the Master, and granting healings unto those who beseech you, O ever-honored victims, precious treasures, all-beauteous flowers, entreat Christ, that He grant unto our souls great mercy.

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

Rejoice, O trinity of new martyrs, who vanquished the hordes of the demons, who manifestly astonished all the angelic beings, and have received a multitude of rewards! O Euphemius who wisely denounced the antichrist and instilled courage of spirit in the faithful, O Ignatius who strangled the prince of darkness and emulated the sufferings of my Christ, and Acacius, who art wholly adorned with innocence: Entreat Christ, that He grant unto our souls great mercy.

*Stichos:* In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

Rejoice, O trinity of new martyrs, who manifestly emulated the endurance, steadfastness and valor of the passion-bearers of old and have received equal crowns. Aflame with the divine love of Christ, O ever-memorable ones, of your own will ye gave yourselves over to death, and are now glorified by us as saints; for, having lawfully completed the contest of suffering, ye have received from Christ lawful and divine crowns. Him do ye entreat, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Rejoice in the Lord, O glorious new martyrs equal in number to the Trinity! Rejoice in Christ God, and again rejoice, O Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, ye thrice radiant and newly chosen choir of three members, valiant force of God the King of all! Rejoice, O ye lilies of Eden made white by feats of asceticism, ye roses of grace dyed with the blood of martyrdom, radiant concord of the divinity of Jesus and union of His love, inseparable unity of the Faith, three-storied fortress of the city of God, triply defended house of the all-holy Trinity, pure abode of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit! Rejoice, most all-comely youths of Christ, holy martyrs, newly sacrificed lambs, bullocks brought to the mystical banquet of Christ our God, whose blood crieth out to the Lord in our behalf!

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone I—

Equal in number with the uncreated Trinity, O wise ones, with the choirs of angels and the ranks of martyrs ye stand, rejoicing, before the throne of the Godhead; wherefore, receiving effulgence from thence through communion, ye impart to the faithful a well-spring of healings and divine enlightenment. O Euphemius, martyr of Christ, wise Ignatius and godly Acacius, pray ye ever in our behalf. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory…, that of the martyred monks; Now & ever…, that from the Pentecostarion, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

The radiant queen of seasons shineth forth today, and the all-radiant new martyrs of Christ now shine forth together with it: the wise Euphemius and Ignatius, with the glorious Acacius, who valiantly proclaimed the divinity of Christ in the arena. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III—

Thou wast resplendent with the faith of Christ, O glorious new martyr, making up a radiant trinity of athletes and forming the number of the divine Trinity. Let blasphemous mouths be stopped which do not accept the suffering of the new martyrs who confess the divinity of Christ! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify you, O holy new martyrs Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye endured for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the ­righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

The feast of thy splendid feats adorneth the whole world, O glorious martyred monk Euphemius. O thrice-blessed one, preserve those who honor thee with love.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in the same tone—

The triumph of the three athletes hath been revealed to the Church today like a lamp illumining the assemblies of Orthodox people.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Luke, § 63 \[Lk. 12: 2-12\]

The Lord said: “There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops. And I say unto you My friends: Be not afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, who after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many sparrows. Also I say unto you: Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: but he that denieth Me before men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone II—

Thy friends have been exceeding precious to me, O God. Their dominion hath been established surpassing well within me. I have loved Thy martyrs exceedingly, O Lord: for, having proclaimed Thy divinity with their very blood, they confirm me in the saving confession of Thy thrice holy name. Wherefore, through the supplications of these Thy new martyrs Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, confirm Thou Thy Church in Orthodoxy, O Christ, and send down rich peace upon the world and great mercy upon our souls.

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the new martyrs, with 8 troparia, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* It is the day of resurrection! Let us be enlightened, O ye people! Pascha, the pascha of the Lord! For from death unto life and from earth to heaven hath Christ our God led those who chant the hymn of victory!

It is the day of the resurrection of the Lord! Come together, all ye faithful, and let us celebrate the feast of the three martyrs; for God the Trinity hath glorified them, who chant a hymn of victory.

It is the day of the resurrection of Christ the King! Come together, O ye faithful, and, beholding all manner of new things, let us celebrate a new feast, hymning the three new martyrs with love.

Let us purify our senses, and let us behold the resurrected Christ and His three new martyrs, who shine with greater brightness than the sun and illumine all the faithful with grace.

Let us purify our senses, and let us behold the three sun-like luminaries who ascend together unto Christ, the Sun Who shone forth from the tomb: the honored new martyrs who illumine the faithful.

Let the heavens be glad as is meet, and let the earth rejoice. Let the Monastery of Iveron celebrate with love, enriched by the treasure of the martyrs’ relics which cannot be taken away.

*Theotokion:* Having seen thy Son and God risen from the dead, thou didst rejoice with the apostles, O pure one full of the grace of God; and as thou art the cause of joy for all, thou wast first to receive the salutation “Rejoice!”, O most immaculate Mother of God.

*Katavasia: The irmoi from the Pentecostarion.*

Ode III

*Irmos:* Come, let us drink a new drink, not miraculously drawn from a barren rock, but the Well-spring of incorruption: Christ Who hath rained forth from the tomb, in Whom we are established.

Come, and during the season of nature’s spring let us gaze upon the noetic spring of the new martyrs, who produce for us all-glorious miracles like flowers.

Now have all things been filled with light, made luminous together by the rising of the Creator. Let the assembly of the faithful celebrate with splendor the memorial of the three passion-bearers.

Holding a palm-frond in thy hand as a token of victory, O wise Euphemius, thou didst fearlessly hasten to the slaughter with joy, afire with the love of Christ.

Protected by the weapon of the Cross, O holy and glorious Ignatius, like a lion thou didst hasten unto thy hanging; and having contended with the enemy, thou didst win the splendid trophy.

“Yesterday Thou wast dead, O Christ,” Acacius cried out as he was beheaded, “and now I am slain for Thy sake! Do Thou Thyself glorify me, O Savior, in Thy kingdom!”

*Theotokion:* Having beheld God, to Whom thou gavest birth in the flesh, risen from the dead as He said, dance thou and magnify Him as God, O pure and all-pure one.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Sessional hymn of the new martyrs, in Tone I—

Your honored memorial hath shone forth upon us like the sun, O godly new martyrs equal in number to the Trinity, illumining the faithful who celebrate it today; and we cry aloud: O passion-bearers, in our behalf entreat Him Who alone loveth mankind!

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in the same tone—

Cruel forms of torture did ye steadfastly endure, O godly martyred monks, Euphemius steadfast of mind, divine Ignatius and thrice blessed Acacius. Ye have been radiantly glorified in similar ways, and even after death have received from on high the grace to heal the sicknesses of those who with faith hasten to the shrine of your relics. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Let the divinely eloquent Habbakuk stand with us on divine watch and show us the radiant angel, who clearly saith: “Today hath the salvation of the world been wrought, for Christ hath risen, in that He is almighty!”

Standing on divine watch, and having Him in their heart, the most blessed martyrs of Christ cried out to Him: “This day hath salvation come unto us, O almighty Savior, if we die for Thy sake!”

“O Thou yearling Lamb Who camest forth from the Virgin, grant now a crown unto us who hasten unto death today for Thy sake,” the new martyrs cried out to Christ, the comely Sun Who shone forth from the tomb.

David, the ancestor of God, leapt, dancing, before the ark of the tabernacle; and, rejoicing, we come to Thee as blood sacrifices, beholding Thee, the comely Christ risen from the tomb,” the martyrs cry aloud.

Through Christ the shrines of the new martyrs pour forth torrents of immortality and an abyss of miracles upon the sick. We touch their bones with faith and behold a wonder: their truly heavenly fragrance.

*Theotokion:* Beholding Christ, to Whom thou gavest birth, shining forth today all-beauteously from the dead for the salvation of all, O pure one who art good, immaculate and beautiful among women, glorify Him, rejoicing with the apostles.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Let us rise very early in the morning and offer hymnody to the Master instead of myrrh; and let us behold Christ, the Sun of righteousness, Who shineth forth life upon all.

We come early to your temple, hymning Christ, the Bestower of life Who hath shone forth from the grave, Who hath made you wondrous and crowned you with glory, O glorious new martyrs.

Beholding your boundless boldness, O new martyrs of the Trinity, the tyrant gave you over to death, and, led to the Trinity, ye hastened with gladsome feet, praising Pascha.

“Let us draw nigh through torments, and instead of myrrh let us offer our blood to the Master!” the wise new martyrs said amid their sufferings as they were slain, praising Pascha.

*Theotokion:* As Thou didst not violate the gates of the Virgin’s virginity at Thine incarnation, O King of creation, so didst Thou not break the seals of the tomb. And Mary, beholding Thee risen from thence, rejoiced.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Thou didst descend into the nethermost depths of the earth, and didst shatter the everlasting bars which held those who were bound, O Christ, and like Jonah from the sea monster Thou didst rise from the tomb on the third day.

Thou didst descend through ascetic feats, O trinity of martyrs, and, having broken the snares of the enemy, didst ascend to the heavens in joy; and the Lord hath crowned you with the splendid diadem of victory.

Traversing the vault of heaven and standing round about the throne of Christ, arrayed in splendid robes of purple, ye rejoice with the choir of the martyrs and the assembly of the venerable.

Desiring to attain unto Christ, the martyrs, having made progress through ascetic labors, truly struggled even unto death and broke asunder the snares of the enemy as they were spiders’ webs.

Having splendidly reached the end of the path of suffering, ye were truly led up to the mansions of heaven, O new martyrs, and received a radiant diadem from the hand of the Master.

Bearing palm-fronds in your hands as trophies and the Cross like a scepter, and wearing the outpouring of your blood like a robe of purple, O godly new martyrs, ye stand before Christ, reigning with Him.

The gates of paradise were opened unto you who kept the Faith of Christ, who finished the race in splendor and fought the good fight, O new martyrs.

*Theotokion:* He Who ineffably dwelt within thy womb, O pure one, descended into the nethermost parts of the earth, and, rising from the dead, raised up Adam with Himself.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

The new celebration of the three passion-bearers hath today been shown forth to the Church, illumining the fullness of the Orthodox like beacons, O Christ.

*Ikos:* O ye who struggle ascetically on Athos, come, let us all hasten together and, assembling in the sacred Skete of the Forerunner, let us behold the strange miracles wrought by the wondrous power of God. And there let us find the three newly martyred monks, Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, who even if only for a time acceded to violence and —alas!— denied Christ, the Savior of all, yet afterwards, having given themselves over to the labors of asceticism and arrived in Constantinople with palm-fronds and branches, contended against falsehood like the three children of Abraham of old. For, putting the false prophet of the deception of Islam to shame as an antichrist, with their own blood they confirmed and established the Orthodox Faith, openly preaching Christ the Savior as both God and man. And travelling from thence the far-flung seas without suffering corruption, they adorned this sacred temple with the shrines of their relics. And now, imparting healings unto those who with faith have recourse unto them, they illumine the assemblies of the Orthodox.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Thou Who delivered the children from the furnace, having become man Thou didst suffer as a mortal, and by Thy suffering Thou hast adorned mortal splendor in incorruption. Thou alone art the blessed and all-glorious God of our fathers!

Having valiantly passed through the good contest, O new martyrs, and paid no heed to the end of the body, ye now stand, rejoicing, before the living Christ, ever partaking of the mystical Pascha in the heavens.

We celebrate the slaying of death, the resurrection of Christ and the honored suffering of the wise new martyrs; and, dancing, we hymn the only blessed and all-glorious God of our fathers, the Cause of all.

Truly sacred and most splendid is this, the all-radiant and divine memorial of Thy three new martyrs, O Christ, which gladdeneth all the faithful, who now hymn Thee, the all-glorious God of our fathers.

Let us take up the clarion of sacred hymns, O ye divinely wise, and, celebrating the sacred memory of the new martyrs, let us say: Rejoice now, ye mystic reflection of the Trinity and delight of us, the faithful!

*Theotokion:* He Who reigneth over all creation, becoming man made His abode within thy womb, O thou who art full of the grace of God, and, having endured crucifixion and death, as God He arose, resurrecting us with Him, in that He is almighty.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* This is the appointed and holy day, the one king and lord of Sabbaths, the feast of feasts and solemnity of solemnities, whereon we bless Christ forever.

This is the chosen and holy day whereon we celebrate the sufferings of your martyrdom, O new martyrs, and, taking up our feasting anew, we hymn Christ as God forever.

Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and with new hymnody today let us celebrate the triumph of the martyrs; and celebrating the resurrection of Christ anew, let us hymn Him as God forever.

Bearing in thy hands the Cross and palm-branches, O wise Euphemius, undaunted thou didst bow thy head beneath the sword, and didst obtain the kingdom of Christ, crying aloud unto Him: Hosanna forever!

Lift up your eyes and gaze about, O trinity of new martyrs, and behold those who have gathered together, who love you with all their soul, and preserve us as friends, brethren and supplicants, who hymn your divine memory.

*Theotokion:* Thy Son, Who cast down the dominion of death, O Virgin, hath, as mighty God, by His own resurrection raised us up and deified us; wherefore, we hymn Him forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Shine, O shine, thou new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord hath shone upon thee! Dance now and be glad, O Sion! And do adorn thyself, O pure Theotokos, for the resurrection of thine Offspring.

*Stichos:* Today, through the arising of Christ, the Bestower of life, the memory of the martyrs shineth forth like the sun.

Be glad, O Skete of the Forerunner of the Savior, for the glory of thy children hath shone forth upon thee! Join chorus now and lift up thy voice in song, for thou hast been enriched by the shrines of the new martyrs as by a well-spring!

*Stichos:* Magnify, O my soul, the three passion-bearers of Christ, the Bestower of life!

O the divine, blessed and most sweet end which the blessed and glorious new martyrs of Christ truly endured! Having them as intercessors, O ye faithful, we shall not be put to shame.

*Stichos:* Magnify, O my soul, the great Euphemius, Ignatius and the godly Acacius!

O the divine, loving and beautiful vow! For ye have promised to live with us yet, as divine guardians of our life. O ye faithful, setting them before the Lord as advocates for us, let us rejoice!

*Stichos:* Today, through the arising of Christ, the Bestower of life, the memory of the three new martyrs shineth forth!

O divine martyrs, O warriors of Christ, O beauteous and all-comely sacrifices of the Trinity: dedicating hymns now to you with love, with all my heart I ask to dwell with you.

*Stichos:* Rejoice, O Virgin! Rejoice, O blessed one! Rejoice, O all-glorious one! For Thy Son hath arisen from the tomb on the third day!

Be glad and rejoice, O divine portal of the Light! For, having descended into the grave, Jesus shone forth, far outshining the sun in brightness, and illumining all the faithful, O Mistress full of joy divine.

Exapostilarion—

Be glad today, O holy Mount Athos! For the Skete of the Forerunner doth celebrate a divine solemnity, possessed of the new martyrs among thy venerable ones: wherefore, it leaveth to thee, O most pure one, to offer such fruits unto the all-holy Trinity.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.

On the Praises, 6 stichera of the new martyrs: 3 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

O ye multitudes of the Orthodox, come, let us hasten together! For, lo! the most radiant feast of the three new martyrs hath dawned, who, having preached Christ risen from the grave, did utterly put the deception of the infidels to shame.

Comprising this new triumph, the godly Euphemius, with Ignatius and Acacius, who are like unto the Trinity in number, stand before the Trinity with the martyrs and the venerable ones, chanting the thrice-holy hymn like the angels.

Truly set afire by your love, O trinity of new martyrs, divine Euphemius, Ignatius steadfast of mind and glorious Acacius, servant of my Christ, behold! we have all assembled to celebrate your memory with faith.

And 3 stichera in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

O all ye choirs of monastics, let us joyfully sing praise to God today in memory of the passion-bearers of Christ, the blessed Euphemius, the wise Ignatius and Acacius, who all struggled steadfastly. Wherefore, they have received crowns and trophies of victory as is meet, and ever pray in our behalf.

O ye glorious venerable martyrs of Christ, ye illumine the world with miracles from the inexhaustible well-spring of the shrine of your precious relics; wherefore, assembled today with love in the temple of God, we all celebrate your memory, asking that before God ye remember those who honor you, O most honored ones.

Ye stood undaunted before the judgment-seat in the court of the iniquitous, O venerable martyrs, proclaiming Christ as God and man, and denouncing falsehood, O blessed Euphemius, godly Ignatius and steadfast Acacius; wherefore, enduring unbearable tortures, ye received crowns from Christ as is meet.

Glory…, in Tone V—

“Behold, what is so good or so beautiful as for brethren to dwell together in unity,” singeth David. For, lo! having come together from divers lands and undertaken the struggles of asceticism in this place, having sanctified Constantinople with the outpouring of their blood and traversed the far-flung seas incorruptibly in their divine relics, the new martyrs Euphemius, Ignatius and Acacius, equal in number to the Trinity, have found rest in this all-beauteous temple, dwelling together like brethren in the Spirit, good and comely; and, sanctifying us through the shrine of their sacred relics and by the dust of their graves, they make unceasing entreaty for us unto the Lord.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies & dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the Pentecostarion, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the new martyrs.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous things.

Epistle to the Romans, § 99 \[Rom. 8: 28-39\]

Brethren, we know that all things work together for good for those who love God, for those who are the called according to his purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom He did predestinate, those He also called: and whom He called, those He also justified: and whom He justified, those He also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God Who justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ Who died, yea rather, Who is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of God, Who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 38

\[Mt. 10: 32-33, 37-38; 19: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before my Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before my Father Who is in heaven. He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.” Then answered Peter and said unto Him: “Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee; what shall we have therefore?” And Jesus said unto them: “Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed Me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one who hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for My name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But many who are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

