The 4th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyred Nun Pelagia

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When at the behest of God thou wast instructed by divine words, O blessed one, like glorious and fertile earth thou didst receive the seed of the Word in the furrows of thy heart and didst produce grain an hundredfold for all who honor thee with faith, O martyr Pelagia, truly delighting their hearts with grace.

Seeking the beauty of Christ, Who alone loveth us, thou didst rush past the beauties of this world and didst hasten to the ever-living fountains of holy baptism; and, filled therewith, thou didst straightway burn with thirst for martyrdom; wherefore, zealously entering into the vessel greatly heated, thou wast vouchsafed a divine end.

As a chosen and pure bride, thou becamest a bride for Him Who was born of her who knew not wedlock, having first, in thine uprightness of mind, spurned a transitory bridegroom and earthly raiment richly dyed; wherefore, O martyr Pelagia, thou hast now received everlasting glory and the vesture of incorruption.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Thy martyr Pelagia, O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I suffer; I am crucified and buried in Thy baptism; I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee, and I die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. Accept me as an unblemished sacrifice, who offer myself to Thee with love!” Through her supplications save our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

AT MATINS

Canon of the virgin martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I truly weave praise for Pelagia”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Grant the dew of the Spirit unto me who now navigate the depths of thy wonders, O all-lauded Pelagia, martyr of Christ, and pilot me to the right tranquil harbor of thy praises.

Consciously inclining toward thy Creator from infancy, O honored one, thou didst reject the love of the corrupt, O most glorious Pelagia; and thou didst manfully trample the passions underfoot by the power of God.

Desiring to receive the laver of divine baptism, thou didst hasten to find a holy hierarch of Christ, O martyr Pelagia, and having received communion, thou wast filled with divine light.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast more holy than the Holy of holies, O pure Virgin, having borne on thine arm Christ, the Holy of holies, Who sustaineth all creation by His divine powers.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Receiving the seed of the word like good earth, O most wise martyr of Christ, thou didst cause it richly to grow. *Twice*

Strengthened with divine teachings as one of the elect, O glorious martyr of Christ, thou didst set forth, hastening to God the Master.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, having manifestly given birth to the Source of supernatural resurrection, thou hast restored my fallen image.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone III—

Disdaining transitory things, having become a partaker of the good things of heaven and received a crown for thy suffering, O most honored Pelagia, thou didst bring the torrents of thy blood as a gift to Christ the Master. Pray thou, that He deliver from misfortunes us who honor thy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Setting thy soul afire with the love of Christ, thou didst manfully enter into the greatly heated cauldron, O divinely wise Pelagia, and becamest a sacrifice of sweet savor for thy Master. Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy memory today, we hymn thee.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst strip off all the beautiful purple robes of this life, O most honored martyr Pelagia, being arrayed in the purple robe of the Master through the laver of regeneration.

Thou didst eclipse thy desires on earth with the desire for the beauties of heaven, O passion-bearer; wherefore, thou hast soared aloft to Christ, crying and saying: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Forsaking abominable religion, thou didst wisely hasten to Christ, O most glorious martyr Pelagia, trampling all the falsehood of idolatry underfoot, O thou who art pleasing to God.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, and even after giving birth wast shown to be a virgin still; wherefore, with unceasing cries and unwavering faith we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Mistress!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Thou wast able to destroy the savagery of the enemy, O all-praised Pelagia, strengthened by the Cross and grace of the Master. *Twice*

Now dost thou truly rejoice, having united thyself to thy Bridegroom through martyrdom, O all-radiant one, holding the lamp of thy virginity.

*Theotokion:* The Lord made His abode within thee, O Mother of God, restoring man who had fallen into corruption through the deception of the serpent.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Having lawfully wedded thyself to Christ, thou didst finish the course of martyrdom, and calling upon thy Bridegroom, thou didst establish thyself in His calm haven. *Twice*

An all-comely wreath of righteousness didst thou plait for thy head, O divinely wise Pelagia, thou crowned martyr; for thou didst preserve thy faith unsullied until the end.

*Theotokion:* Of old the crooked serpent poured his venom into the ears of Eve; but thou alone, O Mother of God, hast shaken him off, having given birth to his Destroyer.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Afire with the divine love of Christ, O martyr, enduring the hidden instrument as the holy children endured the furnace, thou didst cry out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord! *Twice*

O glorious martyr, He Who doth clothe the heaven in clouds illumined thee, who wast naked, devoid of divine vesture, and thou didst sing: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou divine and sanctified habitation of the Most High, for through thee hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art Thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

As an exceeding all-laudable martyr of Christ, devoid of all deceitfulness, thou didst theologize concerning His power, teaching all with divine wisdom, and thou didst draw to piety the people who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! *Twice*

Having manifestly wedded thyself to Christ, thou didst extinguish all the assaults of the tyrant, pouring forth an abyss of wisdom, O most honored martyr Pelagia; and thou hast been adorned with a threefold crown, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O ye faithful, we confess the Son and the Holy Spirit Who have Their origin in the Father, saying that the only-begotten Word Who is equally unoriginate with the Father and the divine Spirit became incarnate of thee, O most immaculate one; and we cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Words cannot express thy praise, O Pelagia; for thou pourest forth an abyss of miracles through the power and grace of thy Bridegroom. Him do thou now entreat, that He save all who hymn thee.

Standing before the tribunal, O martyr Pelagia, thou crownèd bride, thou wast vouchsafed to stand before thine uttermost Desire, and thou hast received sustenance of everlasting delight.

O divinely wise martyr Pelagia, entreat thy Bridegroom, that He grant peace to the world, preserve the Church from perils, and illumine those who hymn thee with grace.

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature thou hast been shown to be both Virgin and Mother, O Theotokos who conceived the Word of the Father, giving birth to Him incarnate. And saved now thereby, O Theotokos, we magnify thee.

