The 5th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy & Glorious Martyr Irene

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

Splendidly arrayed, O most honored one, in a robe empurpled with thy blood, thou didst hasten to Him Whom thou didst desire, the King, Creator and Lord of all, from Whom thou hast truly received a crown of victory. With Him thou reignest now as a virgin and martyr, O thou who suffered greatly.

Thou didst endure the raging of the burning fire, O all-praised one, and the laceration of thy whole body, looking forward to heavenly rewards which Jesus alone hath prepared for those who love Him and fervently desire Him as the most comely Bridegroom of our souls, O most honored one.

Revelling in the love of Christ, thou didst despise the gods of the pagans and their inanimate graven images, O glorious Irene. To those who watched thee thou didst show thyself to be a most manifest pillar of the knowledge of God, in that thou didst suffer, didst finish thy race and preserve the Faith undefiled.

Glory…, Now & ever…: doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Thy ewe-lamb Irene, O Jesus, crieth out to Thee with a loud voice: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I pass through many struggles: I am crucified and buried with Thee in Thy baptism, and suffer for Thy sake, that I might reign with Thee; I die for Thee, that I might live with Thee. As an unblemished sacrifice accept me, who sacrifice myself with love for Thee.” By her supplications save Thou our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory…, that of the martyr; Now & ever…: that from the Pentecostarion, once.

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Cover me with thy supplications, O martyr Irene”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

In that Thou art the crown of the passion-bearer, O Christ, her prayers grant peace to the world and unfading glory to those who hymn Thee.

Shining with the radiance of virginity and adorned with the beauty of thy martyrdom, O Irene of great renown, thou standest before thy Bridegroom.

Entreat thy Bridegroom, O divinely wise Irene, that He be merciful to the Churches and grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thee.

*Theotokion:* In manner past recounting and understanding, O holy Virgin, thou gavest birth to God the Word, Who became flesh and is like unto us.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Sensing the sweet fragrance of Him Who abased Himself, and receiving Him Who hath perfumed the whole world with grace, O glorious one, thou didst take wing toward the desire of Him.

In thy struggles thou didst have God as a helper defending thee, O most wise one; wherefore, crowned, thou didst vanquish the tyrant.

O most lauded one, thou wast an unshakable pillar of virtue, an abode of piety and courage, and a vessel of chastity.

*Theotokion:* Hastening toward thee, death perforce ended its onrush, striking against Him Who was born of thee, O most immaculate one; wherefore, we call thee the firstfruits of immortality.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

Adorned with the beauties of virginity, O virgin Irene, through thy suffering thou becamest most beautiful, dyed in thine own flowing blood; and thou didst cast down the falsehood of ungodliness. Wherefore, thou hast received the honors of victory from the hand of thy Creator.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

When thou wast separated from thy body after many pangs, O martyr, great peace was thy lot; for, rejoicing on high, the Bridegroom in the heavens received thee, all-illumined and radiant in thy suffering, and He led thee, rejoicing, into the divine bridal-chamber.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Proclaiming the coming of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, the prophet cried out with gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

He Who granted peace to thee, seeing thee helping Him for the sake of peace, filled thee with manly understanding and strength, O martyr, namesake of peace.

Overcoming thy womanly weakness with strong fervor, O all-blessed martyr, thou didst steadfastly denounce those who worship falsehood.

Showing forth divine patience, thou didst cast down the arrogance of the tyrants, crying out to thy Bridegroom: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

With constant hymnody and entreaties to the Master, O divinely wise one, thou didst sing, and, having hastened to Him, thou beholdest ineffable glory.

*Theotokion:* Saved by thee, O all-pure one, with joy and gladness we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, O most honored Virgin! Rejoice, O most hymned Theotokos!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

With manly mind thou didst manifestly confess Christ, the God of all; and with steadfast discourse thou didst put the adversary to shame, O passion-bearer.

Thou didst desire to follow the sufferings of Christ, and, suffering like the Master, thou didst fervently follow Him, O thou who art most rich.

Legions of martyrs didst thou lead to Christ by thy wisdom and divine discourse, O glorious one, truly teaching them the mysteries by thy words of faith.

*Theotokion:* Having learned of the mystery of thy conception and thine ineffable and divine birthgiving, O Virgin, we now hymn thee with all honor, O most hymned Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Thou didst set aright the fall of Eve our first mother, O passion-bearer, casting down the power of the enemy and vanquishing his arrogance with divine grace.

Having acquired strength of mind, O Irene, thou didst oppose the tyrants with valor of soul, and hast been crowned by Christ God with a wreath of victory.

With the blood of thy suffering thou didst make thy natural beauty yet more comely, O pure martyr, having steadfastly undertaken valiant struggles, O goodly virgin.

*Theotokion:* He who beheld God revealed beforehand the mystery of thy birthgiving, O pure Ever-virgin Theotokos, in the image of the bush which burned yet was not consumed.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Standing, crowned, before the throne of thy Master, O martyr, preserve those who cry out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou hast been counted worthy to dance in the mansions of heaven, O right wondrous martyr Irene, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Desiring to obtain the beauty of thy Lover, O Irene, thou didst endure the pangs of martyrdom, crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Following the words of thy lips, O Mother of God, we bless thee with faith, crying out to thine Offspring: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst suffer valiantly, O blessed Irene, and didst cast down the tyrant, having as thine invincible aid the power of thy Master assisting thee; and thou didst cry out: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Wounded with youthful love, thou didst follow after thy Bridegroom, bearing His sufferings and wounds on thy body, and crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Thine endurance amid torments mocked those who place their trust in vanity and ungodliness, O crown-bearer Irene; and thou didst chant with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* The Wisdom of God, the Fashioner of all, making His abode within thy womb, O Mother of God, made thee a temple, noetic and animate, for Himself, and hath saved the world, which crieth out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Dancing around thy Lover in the highest, O good virgin Irene, ask peace for the world and remission of offenses for those who with faith keep thy radiant and sacred memory.

Christ hath caused thee, as a martyr and virgin, to dwell within His bridal-chamber, where thou dost rejoice with the virgins and the armies of martyrs, O most lauded and crowned Irene. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.

Opening the gates of heaven, He Who alone reigneth over all, the Giver of justice, received thy most immaculate soul, O namesake of divine peace. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* As thou hast unashamed boldness before thy Son, O all-immaculate one, entreat Him to send peaceful order upon the world, and oneness of mind upon all the Churches, that we may all magnify thee.

