The 6th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy & Righteous Job the Much-suffering

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

O blessed Job, thou wast known to be righteous and guileless, truthful, blameless and faithful, abstaining from every evil thing, truly adorned with the virtues and resplendent in piety. Wherefore, we call thee blessed and, rejoicing, we celebrate today thy holy and honored festival.

Arrayed in the riches of piety as in a costly robe of purple, and adorned with mercy and righteousness as with a divine crown, thou didst exercise dominion over the tyrannical passions, O blameless Job; wherefore, thou hast passed over to the noetic kingdom, to stand before the eternal King, O all-glorious one.

Let us praise Job, the blameless favorite of the Lord, who, amid his trials, was unconquered by the sores of his flesh, the unshaken pillar, who was recognized by all as a bulwark of courage, who with his wisdom-loving mind broke the sting of the devil, the godly and divinely wise one, the confirmation of the pious.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone I—

Seeing the richness of the virtues of Job, the enemy of the righteous plotted to steal them; yet though he broke down the tower of his body, he could not steal the treasure of his spirit: for he who, having stripped me naked, took me captive found the soul of the blameless one fully armed. Wherefore, anticipating my need before the end, O Savior, deliver me from the deceiver and save me.

AT MATINS

Canon of the righteous one, the acrostic whereof is: “It is meet to hymn Job who was afflicted with a myriad sufferings”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted ­captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Beholding with noetic eyes the mighty diamond adorned with the crown of suffering, the Church of Christ holdeth festival in joy, crying aloud: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Neither the tongue of the all-wise nor the mind of man can attain unto thy praise; for the tongue of the Uncreated hath called thee pious, truthful and blameless. Wherefore, we cry out together: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Supposing that the righteous man was protected by his wealth, the deceiver asked to overwhelm him with afflictions, and in overcoming him with violence he himself was shattered, for Job cried out with patience: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

*Theotokion:* The choirs of the prophets hymn and multitudes of the incorporeal ones honor thee, O pure one; for, beholding the Creator of all who ineffably issued forth from thy womb, they chant to Him unceasingly: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

When deprived of thy beloved children and thy wealth thou didst remain unshaken in mind, crying out: Blessed is the name of my Lord!

Thou didst make both riches and poverty a matter of virtue; for subjected to both, like gold seven times purified thou didst show thyself to be most pure.

The serpent, the author of evil, exposed thee to the words of thy wife, as he had our forefather; but he who boasted exceedingly in his craftiness was foiled.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Mother who knewest not wedlock, who contained God the Word in thy womb and gave birth to Him, incarnate as both God and man.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As the firstfruits…”—

Shown to be truthful and righteous, pious, blameless and sanctified, O most glorious one, thou true favorite of God, thou hast enlightened the world with thy patience, O most patient and valiant one. Wherefore, O thou who art divinely wise, we all hymn thy memory.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

Let us all bless and faithfully praise the blameless and most pure Job, the most exalted tower who in spirit was not conquered by the wiles of the enemy, the great favorite of Christ, who earnestly entreateth Him to save our souls from misfortunes.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard of Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, how Thou wast born of the Virgin, that Thou mightest save from deception those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The blameless Job hath been shown forth to us as a most exemplary model and animate pillar, and he hath made us his emulators, who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O all-blessed Job, He Who healeth the crime which was committed in Eden healed the sufferings which thine innocent soul endured with forbearance and patience on the dung-hill.

Considering with his holy mind, Job chanted: “Having received good things from the Lord, shall I not then steadfastly endure my pangs? Glory to Thy power, O Lord!”

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O all-glorious Bride of God who knewest not wedlock, and gavest birth to the Savior in the flesh, and without ceasing we cry out to thee thus: Rejoice, O intercessor for thy servants!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God, Who hast shone forth the light, hast illumined the morning, and made manifest the day!

The pangs attendant upon thy sores have plaited for thee a great many wreaths, O glorious Job, consoling thee for the evils thou didst endure.

Like a youth thou wast shown to be invincible amid evils, O righteous and blameless Job, and even in thy wealth thou didst merit no reproach.

Keeping watch to preserve thy soul unharmed, O glorious one, thou didst valiantly endure the cruel storm of the enemy.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, creation crieth out, offering thee the words of the angel: Rejoice, O pure Mother of Jesus the Son of God!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

The ear is amazed, delighting in thy words, for thou wast shown to be a tongue full of the mysteries of the divine Spirit Who created and taught thee.

Healing him who suffered pain of heart, from thine eyes thou didst pour forth tears of loving-kindness, interceding for orphans and widows, O glorious Job.

Thy life was noble and full of the love of God; wherefore, thy death hath been shown to be a time of rest, O Job, and thou hast passed over to unceasing gladness.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate Theotokos, we beseech thee: In behalf of thy servants entreat Him Who became incarnate through thee, for we acknowledge thee alone as our intercessor.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Without having tasted of things which are not lawful, but upholding the fullness of the prophets and the law, O Job, thou didst please God with thy love, chanting: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Not laying up treasures on earth, but having thy hope in the heavens, thou didst consider gold as dust, and didst desire to chant unto God: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The enemy of the righteous stripped thee of the children of thy love and thy possessions, yet the might of thy soul did not cease to cry: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Triadicon:* O ye divinely wise, piously theologizing concerning the Essence in three Hypostases—the Word and the Spirit Who have their origin in the Father—we cry out with faith: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Her who without knowing wedlock received in her womb in manner past recounting the immutable God Who in His mercy entered into fellowship with men, do we piously hymn as the Mother of God forever.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Christ God, Who appeared in the guise of an angel in the fiery furnace of the chanting youths, do ye hymn, O children, and bless, O priests! Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Christ God, Who appeared in the guise of an angel in the fiery furnace of the chanting youths, do ye hymn, O children, and bless, O priests! Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The whole choir of those who keep festival doth celebrate in the highest with the wondrous Job who is hymned, chanting: Sing, ye children; bless, ye priests; ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

The Judge of the contest hath awarded thee twofold crowns, on earth and in heaven, O divinely wise Job. Wherefore, thou criest: Bless, ye priests; ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

O thou who art most rich, the sores of thy flesh pour forth healings upon the souls and bodies of those who chant: Bless, ye priests; ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

Thou didst experience infirmity and health, riches and poverty in thy life, O blessed one, for, being manifest to many as radiant, thou criest: Ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Her who ineffably and seedlessly conceived and gave birth to Christ God, the Joy of the whole world, do ye hymn, O children; bless, O priests; and exalt supremely for all ages, ye people!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Job was worthily crowned with splendor for his patience; but thou, O Satan, the only enemy of the righteous, wast put to shame, for thine expectation proved in vain, and thou weepest and art downcast, unable to bear the crowning of the righteous one.

Gazing upon Thine immortal glory, insofar as it is possible for men to behold it, and seized with fear and trembling greatly, Job cried out with reverence: “I am dust and earth, but Thou art the Lord!” Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

The books of life have received thee as is meet, and the store-houses of heaven have taken thee in like ripe grain, and thou art full of the days of the Spirit, O blessed Job, favorite of the Lord. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.

*Triadicon:* O worshipful Trinity our God, thou Unity in three Hypostases, all-holy and one in glory, thou hast shown Thyself to the world as light, life and incorruption. Save Thy servants from deception, that we may worship Thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be a receptacle of Wisdom far exceeding the mind, O all-immaculate Maiden, and an animate throne and gate; wherefore, virgins, loving thee as their Queen, O Virgin, have brought themselves forth, following in the train of thee, the divine Maiden.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Galatians §213 \(5:22-6:2\)

Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to St. Matthew, §43

\(Matt 11:27-30\)

The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

