Also on THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY

**Commemoration of Apparition of the Holy Archangel Michael on Mount Garganus, in Apulia of Italy**
{{text_align=center}}

**At Vespers**
{{text_align=center}}

*On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 3 of the Archangel, in Tone I Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—*

O Michael, joy of the New Israel, as thou didst guard and guide the chosen people of God, so now by thy divine apparition fill us with awe and gladness, that we may ever give praise unto Lord.

As a swift herald of God, O Michael, thou didst bear tidings of His dispensation unto all His people on earth; wherefore, reveal to us His unfathomable mind, that we may ever do His holy will.

As of old, in Colossae, thou didst divert the raging river, preserving from death the servant of God, so now O Michael, chief Archangel of God, save us from the torrents of our transgressions.

*Glory…: Idiomelon, in Tone V—*

In the days of the law which hath passed away, when Balaam the Prophet was summoned to Moab to curse the chosen people of the Lord, the ass whereon he rode spake human words, revealing to its rider that the angel of God’s wrath stood in the path, his sword unsheathed, to slay him should he dare to carry out the ungodly task. And in the latter days of grace, a bullock, moved by God, drew the faithful to the cave high up on Mount Garganus, where Michael, the Archangel of the Lord, resplendent in the armor of light divine, commanded that the place wherein he appeared be held in veneration by the faithful for all ages. And as a sign that this was the will of Christ, by the strength of the Most High the spring that arose therein did he imbue with the power to heal the infirmities of both men and beasts. O the great and all-glorious wonder!

*Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.*

*Aposticha stichera from the Pentecostarion.*

*Glory…: Idiomelon of the Archangel,, in Tone VI—*

In Jerusalem on Mount Sion, the Pool of Bethesda was a source of the wondrous curing of the blind, and the strengthening of the lame and the paralyzed, for betimes the Lord would send His angel down to trouble its waters, that by the token of the movement thereof the afflicted might know that the season of their healing was at hand and avail themselves of its power. And in the cave at the summit of Mount Garganus the holy Archangel Michael revealed another well-spring, likewise replete with the grace of healing, whereto the faithful have recourse with reverence and piety, drawing forth therefrom deliverance from all their infirmities, giving praise and thanksgiving unto God Whom all the hosts of heaven unceasingly glorify.

*Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.*

*Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV—*

O supreme commander of the armies of Heaven, we, the unworthy, ever entreat thee: By thy prayers ever surround us with the protection of the wings of thine immaterial glory, preserving us who earnestly fall down before thee and cry aloud: Deliver us. O Michael, from misfortunes, in that thou art the leader of the hosts on high.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion from the Pentecostarion.*

**At Matins**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; that of the Archangel, once; Now & ever:, from the Pentecostarion.*

*Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the Archangel, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is “Guide and protect us, O great Archangel”, in Tone VIII—*

Ode I
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto God, Who delivered Israel from the bitter bondage of Pharaoh, and guided them with the pillar of fire and the cloud of light, for He hath been glorified.

God, the God of Israel, Who freed His chosen people from dire slavery in Egypt, assigned to them the great Archangel Michael as their wise guide and mighty protector.

Unto God do the blessed Archangel and all the hosts of heaven ever chant praises, singing in choirs the thrice-holy hymn: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O Lord of all!

In exultation doth the all-holy Archangel Michael bow down in worship before the dread throne of the transcendent Trinity, singing: Holy art Thou, O Lord of hosts!

*Theotokion:* Though she doubted the message of the Archangel Gabriel, yet did the all-holy Virgin cry aloud in obedience: “Let it be unto me according to thy word, O servant of God!”

Ode III
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Plant Thou the fear of Thee in the hearts of Thy servants, O Lord, and be Thou the confirmation of us who call upon Thee in truth.

Ever in awe of the effulgent glory of the Most High, reflected in thy radiant appearance, O Michael, we cry out to thee in holy fear.

Armies of angels in heaven obeyed thy divine orders, O Michael, for as their chief commander thou didst utterly rout the hordes of Lucifer.

Not a word of reproach didst thou utter unto Satan, O Archangel, save “The Lord rebuke thee”, when standing guard over the body of Moses.

*Theotokion:* Defend thy poor children, whom thou didst adopt at the foot of the Cross of thy Son, O Virgin, from every machination of the vile deceiver.

*Kontakion of the Archangel, in Tone II—*

O chief commander of God, minister of glory divine, captain of the angels and instructor of men: Beg thou great mercy and that which is profitable for us, for thou art the supreme commander of the bodiless hosts.

*Ikos:* In Thy Scriptures, O Immortal One Who lovest mankind, Thou didst say that a multitude of angels rejoiceth in heaven over one man who repenteth. Wherefore, O Sinless One, Who alone knowest the hearts of men, amid our transgressions we ever make bold to beseech Thee to have pity and send down compunction upon us, unworthy though we are, granting us forgiveness, O Master, in that Thou art compassionate; for the supreme commander of Thy bodiless hosts doth entreat Thee in behalf of us all.

*Sessional hymn of the Archangel, in Tone VIII : Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—*

More potent that the Pool of Bethesda is the spring on Mount Garganus; for of old the angel of the Lord would come down to trouble the waters of the Pool only at certain times and seasons, that the sick and suffering might find relief from their infirmities; but the spring revealed by the Archangel Michael in the cave of Mount Garganus is a constant and never-failing source of healing for man and beast alike. Wherefore, lift up your voices, O ye faithful, and give thanks to the King of the angels, Who sitteth in glory upon the cherubim as upon a dread and awesome throne.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.*

Ode IV
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Stretch forth unto me a helping hand, as Thou didst to Peter, and have mercy and save me, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Peter was delivered by an angel from the prison of Herod, O Michael; wherefore, stretch forth thy hand and save us all.

Reflecting the ineffable effulgence of the Godhead like a mirror, O archangel, thou dost likewise reflect His love for mankind.

O the mighty victory thou didst achieve over the rebellion of Satan, O glorious one! Wherefore, save us, thy servants.

*Theotokion:* Take us by our wretched and outstretched hands, O Theotokos, and draw us forth from the fœtid mire of our vile sins.

Ode V
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* O Christ, Thou good Bestower of light and peace, from darkness and battle deliver me who rise early to Thy praise.

Ever arrayed in light as in armor, and armed with the glory of God, thou didst triumph over the hordes of darkness.

Cast into the uttermost abyss, Lucifer and his minions were driven from heaven by thy might, O archangel of God.

Thou dost bestow grace divine upon all of us who sing the praises of God, rising early to glorify Him, O holy one.

*Theotokion:* Unto thee, the most immaculate Mother of God and Virgin, do we cry out for aid amid the noetic battles of our life.

Ode VI
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Out of the belly of hades Thou didst hearken to the sound of my cry, and didst deliver my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One.

Satan fell headlong from the heights of heaven into the darksome fires of Gehenna, O Michael, flung down by thee into the abyss of corruption.

Our desperate cries rise unto thy noetic ears, O wondrous archangel; wherefore, deliver us ever from all enemies, visible and invisible.

Glory shineth ineffably from thy radiant countenance, O mighty one, illumining those who languish in darkness and the shadow of death.

*Theotokion:* Rampart and bulwark of protection art thou for all the faithful, O Queen of heaven, who hearkenest mercifully to our piteous pleas.

*Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.*

Ode VII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who by Thine Angel didst save the youths from the fire and didst transform the thundering furnace into dew!

Every Christian rejoiceth in the presence of an angel guardian, and also in the mighty defender, the Archangel Michael, given us by the God of our fathers.

As the furnace roared like thunder, the Angel of Great Counsel delivered the youths from its fires; and He hath given us His Archangel Michael as our deliverer.

Through the intercession of the Archangel, the grace of God descendeth like dew upon us who burn with the flames of all the carnal passions of this world.

*Theotokion:* Awed by the ineffable mystery wrought in thy most pure womb, O all-holy Mary, we who are saved thereby cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

“Rebuked be thou by the Lord!” said the holy Archangel unto Satan, who made baseless argument, disputing ownership of the body of Moses as it lay dead upon Mount Nebo.

Come, let us ascend Mount Garganus, mindful that the Psalmist telleth us to lift up our eyes to the hills, whence cometh our help; and let us there entreat the holy archangel

Halting in wonder at the sight of the divine glory which shone forth from thee, O Michael, the faithful exclaimed in awe and wonder: Hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* All Orthodox Christians render glory to the Virgin Mother of God, the mountain overshadowed by the mystery of God, crying: Hymn and magnify her supremely for all ages!

Ode IX
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Now let Apulia be glad, and let all Italy rejoice exceedingly! Let the ranks of angels magnify their awesome leader, the great Archangel Michael, and let the assemblies of the pious likewise lift up their voices, praising their heavenly mediator.

God, Who took flesh of the immaculate womb of the Virgin and became man for the sake of us sinners, hath filled all mortal flesh with awe at His ineffable condescension in assigning to us the great Archangel Michael as an omnipotent guardian.

Every human mind is stricken with awe, and every human tongue falleth mute, when called upon to fashion fitting praise for the Archangel Michael, the supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, given to men as a mighty intercessor.

*Theotokion:* Let the ranks of men and angels together give utterance to laudation as is meet, pondering with awe the mystery of the incarnation of God, Who made her womb more spacious than the heavens, for which cause we magnify her with praise.

*Exapostilarion of the Archangel: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—*

As of old thou didst trouble the waters of the Pool of Bethesda, O commander of the armies of heaven, so now by the waters of thy miraculous spring wash away all our ailments and drive away the demons, that we may render thee honor as is meet.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.*

*On the Praises, the stichera from the Pentecostarion; and Glory….Idiomelon of the Archangel, in Tone VIII—*

Michael, the great Archangel of the Lord, foremost leader of the bodiless armies of heaven, doth summon us today to celebrate the memorial of his glorious apparition. Wherefore, with jubilation let us ever exalt him, for he is ever present among us, guarding the faithful people of God against Satan’s every assault. Let us, therefore, weave words of hymnody into wreaths of praise, and having purified our mind and heart, let us crown the holy one; for, standing ever before the throne of God on high, and chanting the thrice-holy hymn with the hosts of his command, he prayeth unceasingly that our souls be saved.

*Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.*

*Aposticha stichera from the Pentecostarion.*

*Glory…: Idiomelon of the Archangel, in Tone III—*

As the champion of the dignity of the All-holy Trinity, and chief commander of the hosts of the angels of God, the glorious Michael triumphed over prideful Lucifer and cast him and his rebellious forces into the uttermost abyss of Tartarus. Wherefore, as he is full of the power of the love of the Lord, let us now have recourse unto him most speedily, crying aloud from the depths of our afflictions: O holy Archangel Michael, from all want and grief, from infirmities and grievous sins, free those who hymn and entreat thee with steadfast faith.

*Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.*

**At Liturgy**
{{text_align=center}}

*On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the Pentecostarion; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Archangel.*

*Prokimenon from the Penecostarion, that that of the Archangel, in Tone IV—*

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 305
{{text_align=center}}

Brethren, if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by those who heard Him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to His own will? For unto the angels hath He not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying: “What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that Thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of Thy hands: Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet.” For in that He put all in subjection under him, He left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, Who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that He by the grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became Him, for Whom are all things, and by Whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.

*Alleluia, from the Pentecostarion, and for the Archangel, in Tone V—*

*Stichos:* Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His hosts.

Gospel according to Luke, § 51
{{text_align=center}}

The Lord said to His disciples: “He who heareth you heareth Me; and he who despiseth you despiseth Me; and he who despiseth Me despiseth Him Who sent Me.” And the seventy returned again with joy, saying: “Lord, even the demons are subject unto us through Thy name.” And He said unto them: “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said: “I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight. “

*Communion verses: that from the Pentecostarion, and this verse for the Archangel—*

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

