Also on THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE PRECIOUS RELICS OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS NICHOLAS,

ARCHBISHOP OF MYRA IN LYCIA, FROM MYRA TO BARI IN ITALY

AT GREAT VESPERS:

We chant “Blessed is the man...”, the first antiphon.

At “Lord, I have cried...”, we chant 3 stichera from the Pentecostarion, and 5 for the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Hastening to heaven...”—

Having attained unto the heaven of exalted virtues, thou wast shown to be a wonder-worker in Myra, O glorious one. And though reposing bodily in Bari, thou dost visit the faithful everywhere in spirit, and dost rescue all from misfortunes. Receiving honor as is meet, thou art glorious among hierarchs, O blessed favorite of Christ. And crying out to thee now in supplication, we say: O holy hierarch Nicholas, entreat the Savior of all, that He bring peace to the world and to save our souls! *Twice*

Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with hymns of supplication let us joyously praise the honored translation of our defender, who enlighteneth all the ends of the earth with miracles, bringeth comfort to the sorrowful in manner divine, delivereth the oppressed; who borrowed through the mercy of God, and, therefore, hath received recompense an hundredfold. To him let us all cry aloud: O holy hierarch Nicholas, entreat the Savior of all, that He bring peace to the world and to save our souls! *Twice*

By thy virtues thou hast reached the abode of the angels, and dost stand before Christ, thy Master, Whose obedient servant thou wast. And from thy shrine thou dost gush forth myrrh, helping the faithful with thy miracles, and leading the pious to God. Not from Bari do we now invoke thee, but from the Jerusalem on high, where thou rejoicest with the apostles, prophets and hierarchs in gladness. O divinely wise Nicholas, entreat the Savior of all, that He bring peace to the world and to save our souls!

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us hymn the adornment of hierarchs, the glory of the fathers, the wellspring of miracles and great defender of the faithful, saying: Rejoice, O protector of Myra, honored primate and steadfast pillar of its Church! Rejoice, O most radiant beacon, illumining the ends of the earth with wonders! Rejoice, divine joy of the sorrowful and fervent intercessor for the oppressed! And now, O blessed Nicholas, cease not to entreat Christ God in behalf of them that honor thine ever-gladsome and most illustrious memory with faith and love.

Now & ever..., from the Pentecostarion. Entrance.

Prokimenon of the day.

Three readings for a holy hierarch:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At the Litia, these stichera—

*In Tone II:* Though the land of Myra is silent, O father Nicholas, yet the whole world, enlightened by thee with the fragrance of myrrh and a multitude of wonders, doth cry aloud with hymns of praise; and the condemned who have been saved by thee, together with those in Myra and us here, all cry aloud, chanting: Pray thou that our souls be saved!

*In Tone IV:* O father Nicholas, thou art a phial full of the myrrh of the Holy Spirit, for in Myra didst thou emit the fragrance of divine perfume. Yet as thou wast like unto the apostles of Christ, thou hast traversed the world in the rumor of thy miracles. Wherefore, though far away, still thou dost appear as close, manifesting thyself in dreams, and saving from death those condemned by an unjust verdict. And in manner most glorious dost thou even now save those who cry out to thee amid their many tribulations. Wherefore, by thy prayers deliver also from grievous assaults us who ever praise thee.

*In Tone VIII:* The fruit of thy valorous deeds, O venerable father, hath enlightened the hearts of the faithful. For who hath heard tell of thy boundless humility, patience, serenity, and consolation of the destitute and the sorrowful, and hath not marvelled? Thou didst instruct all in godly manner, O hierarch Nicholas, and hast now been crowned with a wreath unfading. Intercede thou in behalf of our souls.

O Nicholas, in this transitory life thou didst hasten to praise the Lord, and He hath glorified thee in the true and celestial life. Wherefore, in that thou hast boldness before Him, pray that our souls be saved.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O good servant of the faithful, laborer in the vineyard of Christ: thou didst bear thy daily burden and didst increase the talent entrusted to thee; and thou didst not envy those who came after thee. Wherefore, as the portals of heaven are open to thee, enter thou into the joy of the Lord, and intercede for us, O holy Nicholas.

Now & ever..., from the Pentecostarion.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

Let us bless Nicholas, the most glorious hierarch, the star unwaning of the all-radiant Sun, the spiritual noetic heaven which showeth forth the saving glory of God, the divine preacher, the enlightener of the heathen, the river flowing with the waters of knowledge, watering the hearts of the faithful.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Thy passage was by sea from Myra in Lycia to the city of Bari, O hierarch; for, with the permission of the Master of all, thy coffin was taken from thy grave by a monk who piously served at thy tomb and rendered thee honor; and it passed from the East unto the West, O Nicholas most glorious.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Having sanctified the waters of the sea by thy voyage to the city of Bari, thou didst pour forth myrrh, O glorious one, healing incurable sufferings. Thou becamest its refuge, defender and deliverer, O hierarch Nicholas, praying to the Savior and King of all.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O man of God and faithful servant, minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, chosen vessel, pillar and foundation of the Church, heir of the Kingdom: Cease thou never to cry unto the Lord in our behalf.

Now & ever...: from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

The day of splendid solemnity is come; the city of Bari rejoiceth, and with it the whole world doth exult with hymns and spiritual songs. For today is the sacred feast of the translation of the precious and much-healing relics of the hierarch Nicholas the wonder-worker. For like the never-setting Sun, he shineth with brilliant beams of light, driving away the darkness of temptations and misfortunes from them that cry out with faith: Save us, O Nicholas, for thou art our intercessor!

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord...”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory..., that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever...: that from the Pentecostarion again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, the sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, twice.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled...”—

Thou didst make thy hierarch wondrous among the nations, O Master, bestowing upon him the grace of miracles: to dispel divers ailments from men, to loose those in fetters and to deliver the oppressed from grievous circumstances. To him do we cry out in supplication: O holy Nicholas, deliver us from our enemies. *Twice*.

Glory..., Now & ever...: from the Pentecostarion; or the following Theotokion—

Who can recount the multitude of mine impure desires and the ragings of my wicked thoughts, O all-immaculate one? And who can describe the watchfulness and malice of mine incorporeal foes? But by thine entreaties, O good one, grant me deliverance from all of these.

After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion of the saint, with selected psalm verses for a holy hierarch—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice*.

Then, the sessional hymn of the Polyeleos, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

Having sanctified thyself with a perfect life, thou wast shown to be a hierarch of God Most High; and, strengthened by Him, thou didst stop the mouths of the heretics. Wherefore, magnifying Christ God, we joyously celebrate the translation of thy relics. *Twice*.

Glory..., Now & ever...: from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion—

O pure and unwedded Virgin Theotokos, thou sole defense and protection of the faithful: Deliver from misfortunes and grievous circumstances all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden; and save our souls through thy divine entreaties.

The first antiphon of the Hymn of Degrees, in Tone IV.

The Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

The Gospel according to John, § 35,

from the midpoint \[Jn. 10: 1-8\].

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O heir of God, fellow communicant of Christ, minister of the Lord, holy Nicholas: as was thy name, so also was thy life. For the radiance of thy countenance bore witness to thine intellect, shining forth in thy hoary head and thine innocence of spirit; and thy serenity proclaimed thy meekness. Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the saints. Pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Ode I

The Canon of the Saint, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us send up a hymn unto our wondrous God, Who freed Israel from bondage, singing and crying out a hymn of victory unto Thee Who alone art Master.

Accept Thou the song of my lips, O Christ my Benefactor, and cleanse Thou my tongue, being not mindful of my manifold sins; that I may extol in song the honorable life of Thy hierarch, in memory of the translation of his relics.

Having received the gift of working miracles, and crowns of patience, and being adorned with thy hierarchal office, do thou beseech God, O our Father, that He grant remission of transgressions to us who glorify the translation of thy relics.

O Father, shepherd of the flock of Christ, thou art sent to other sheep, of the Latin tongue, that thou mayest astonish all with thy wonders and lead them to Christ. O blessed one, pray thou unceasingly in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* The heathen nations formerly far removed have drawn nigh unto God through thy birthgiving, O Theotokos; and, deified and set free from the ancient curse by thy blood, I have been given rebirth by thee.

Another Canon to the Holy Hierarch, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Illumine my soul and heart, I pray thee, O Bestower of light and Fashioner of creation. Grant unto me the gift of praising in song Thy most honored favorite, by whom do Thou deliver the world from misfortune.

Having acquired heavenly wisdom, thou didst invest it as a talent entrusted to thee; for, having set at nought the guile of those opposed to God, thou didst enlighten the people with divine instruction.

*Theotokion:* From a Maiden is the Infant born, pre-eternal of origin and preserved in perfection, Whom thou didst preach in two Natures and in one Hypostasis, O divinely blessed one.

Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Guileless in manner and meek in demeanor, possessed of an angelic life, O divinely blessed Nicholas: cease thou never to pray to Him Who loveth mankind, in behalf of us all.

What city doth not have thee as a helper, O blessed one? What soul uttereth not thy name? And what place dost thou not visit in spirit, astounding all with thy wonders, O Nicholas?

Though the city of Bari hath received thy body, yet thy spirit dwelleth in the heavenly Jerusalem, where thou exultest with the prophets, apostles and holy hierarchs, praying in our behalf to Him Who alone loveth mankind.

*Theotokion:* Beg thou enlightenment for me who am engulfed in darkness because of my many sins, O all-pure Lady who gavest birth to the Light of the whole world; and drive far from me the gloom of the passions, O divinely blessed one.

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

The grieving have found great consolation; they that are in darkness have acquired the light; and those assailed by sorrows have in thee received deliverance from evils, O most sacred father.

O holy hierarch Nicholas, who wast the mouth of God: thou hast delivered men from the maw of the diabolic wolf, O glorious one, and hast borne them to the Creator as a gift, granting healing unto all.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Mother of God: the Word Who chose for Himself a servant, the hierarch Nicholas, as a teacher of His people, did will to be born of thee alone in the flesh, in manner past all recounting.

Kontakion from the Pentecostarion, with its Ikos; and the Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

The translation of thy precious relics is for us an occasion of splendid celebration, O Nicholas, holy hierarch of the Lord whom we piously praise, joyously honoring thee, the light of the never-setting Sun, thou adornment of the faithful. *Twice*.

Glory..., Now & ever...: the Sessional hymn, or Hypacoi, from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thou didst mount Thy steeds, Thine apostles, O Lord, and didst take their bridles in Thy hands; and Thy chariot hath become salvation for those who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Enlighten my heart and dispel from it the gloom of sin, O holy hierarch who art illumined by the light of the Most High, that I may joyously hymn the holy translation of thy relics.

Having ascended the ladder of the virtues, O blessed one, thou wast revealed to all the world as a wonder-worker, O Nicholas; wherefore the people of Bari removed thy holy relics from Myra.

Faithful priests rejoice in thee, and Christ-loving princes call upon thee as an ally in battle; and we, unworthy though we are, exhort thee to pray to God in our behalf, O Nicholas.

*Theotokion:* The depth of thy mystery doth astound the ranks of the angels, O Theotokos, and thine icon doth cast the demons into confusion; and honoring thee as the Mother of God, we bow down before it.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God — the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin — the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O herald of God, through partaking of the primal light of God, thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary, enlightening with thy splendor them that are in darkness, in that thou art a lover of virtue, soaring aloft in glory.

Deliver thy flock from the tempests of sins, from waves of tribulation and hostility, guiding us ever to the calm haven by thy saving prayers.

*Theotokion:* He to Whom thou gavest birth in an ineffable manner is by nature the unutterable Light of the Most High, Who is rich in mercy, and hath enriched us, impoverished as we are, with the gifts of God.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Christ God, Bestower of light, Who didst dispel the primeval darkness of the abyss: disperse the gloom of my soul, and grant me the light of Thy commandments, O Word, that, rising early, I may glorify Thee.

Thy cathedra was in Myra, but thy body was transported to Bari; yet in spirit thou dwellest with the apostles in heaven, in that thou art their successor. With them pray for us who hymn the translation of thy relics.

O hope of all Christians and great defender of the oppressed, healer of the afflicted, consolation of the grieving and intercessor before the Lord for the human race: beg thou peace for our land, and save us from the incursions of the aliens.

Through thine intercessions, O Nicholas, do thou enliven my soul which hath drowned because of its many passions and hath been slain by the fall; and guide it to repentance, that I may glorify the translation of thy relics with all the faithful.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou dost nourish as a babe Him Whom the myriads of angels and multitudes of the seraphim fear, and before Whom all reason-endowed creatures tremble; and, beholding Him in thine arms, we ever worship Him, as is meet.

Canon II

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Having acquired beautiful feet through the working of many wonders, thou didst bring glad tidings of good things to all. Freeing all from the ancient enmity by thy divine teaching, save us, O sacred hierarch.

Embarking upon the crest of the sea by God’s will, thou didst arrive at the city of Bari, having traversed the deep with many pious men, O blessed Nicholas.

*Theotokion:* We truly glorify thee, O Virgin Mother of God, as the shield of the faithful, crying out to thee as did the angel: Rejoice, thou who art blessed and full of grace, awesome rumor and report, wondrous place of rest for the Master of all creation!

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the uttermost abyss, O Christ God, in that Thou lovest mankind deliver me from my sins, and direct my life, I beseech Thee.

Health of body and cleansing of soul do we receive abundantly from thy divine church as from a pool, O holy hierarch Nicholas; for through grace wonders pour forth upon them that trust in thee with faith unfeigned.

As thou art the most glorious favorite of Christ, O father, deliver thy servants, who honor the translation of thy holy relics, from all manner of danger, from grievous misfortunes and the sorrows that beset us.

Blighted by the frost of sin and driven by the wind of life, let me be warmed by thy prayers, gazing upon the likeness of thy divine image; for thou art a second sun, O father Nicholas, thou servant of Christ.

*Theotokion:* The earthly mind cannot comprehend heavenly mysteries; neither can a creature attain to knowledge of the Creator: for the birth of the Lord from the Virgin passeth man’s understanding. And entreating her with faith, we shall receive remission of sins.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Save us by thy guidance, O Nicholas, preacher and teacher of the nations, who hast led to salvation the people of God Who appeared in the flesh for the benefit of many.

O thou who didst have the sea as thy way and the waters as thy paths: beseech the Lord, that we may navigate the sea of life unharmed, and may reach the heavenly kingdom by the waters of our tears.

*Theotokion:* Thou art the portal of the King of the heavens and the temple of His glory, O all-hymned Virgin. Open thou the gates of mercy, and lead us into the abode of heavenly glory by thy supplications.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the ­Virgin...”—

Thy relics have moved like a star, from the East unto the West, O holy hierarch Nicholas; and the sea hath been sanctified by thy passage. The city of Bari receiveth grace through thee, for thou hast been shown forth for us as a wonder-worker: illustrious, most wondrous and merciful.

*Ikos:* Let us now praise with hymns the holy hierarch, pastor and teacher of the people of Myra, that by his entreaties we may be enlightened. For he is shown to be wholly pure, incorrupt of spirit, bringing unto Christ an unblemished sacrifice, pure and well-pleasing unto God, in that he is a hierarch pure of both body and soul. Wherefore, he is truly an intercessor and champion for the Church, and a wonder-worker: illustrious, most wondrous and merciful.

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* On the plain of Dura the tyrant once built a furnace to torment the God-bearers; and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, and sang, all three together, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Today the angels of God rejoice and a multitude of demons lamenteth; for He hath delivered the people from temptation and hath driven away the spirits of darkness. Wherefore, thou, O Nicholas, art worthily called victor; for which cause we chant unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

They that are taken with the grief of sickness, who are heavy laden with divers afflictions, hasten to thy shrine with faith, and, having received thy mercy, depart in haste, joyfully chanting unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The assemblies of the people stand before thee, O blessed one, and the teachers of the Church rejoice in thee. Kings glorify thee as their defender; and we entreat thee, O Nicholas: Save us who chant unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O how can I chant unto my Savior, Whom even the angels praise with trembling? But do thou, O Mother, direct me, and by thy compassion move the mercy of thy Son to have pity on us who set our hope on thee. As thou dost beseech Him in our behalf, deliver us from torment.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

By thy word grant healing to the whole human soul which, like salt, hath lost its savor through the vanity of things; and teach us to chant unto the Lord: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O most glorious are the wonders thou hast wrought! For thou healest infirmities and deliverest from misfortunes, commanding all to chant unto the Lord: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, thou art the defender and rampart of our lowliness, and we, thy servants, ever cry unto the Lord: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* O ye angels and heavens, bless, hymn and exalt supremely Him Who sitteth upon the throne of glory and as God is glorified unceasingly forever!

The angels of the heavens accept thee as a minister, and the prophets greet thee as a fellow servant. The Lord Himself receiveth thee. And we sinners ask thee for mercy.

Great is the authority given thee by God, O Nicholas: the sea is subject to thee; the winds obey thee; and the nations, beholding thy most glorious wonders, submit themselves to thee.

O Savior, Thou hast shown Thy holy hierarch Nicholas to be more glorious than Moses, delivering from all tribulation the New Israel, the Christian people.

*Theotokion:* In that thou art the Mother of God, ask for us remission of sins, O Lady, and stretch forth thy hand unto me, who am sunk in the abyss of despair, that, raised up by hope, I may exalt thee supremely for all ages.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst grow as a sweet-smelling flower in the land of Myra, O glorious one, wafting gifts of healing like fragrant perfume upon all that praise thee and sing: O ye works, chant unto the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having poured out the sweetness of God’s grace like oil from the Mount of Olives, thou didst have in the sea a path made safe by the grace of the Lord, to Whom we sweetly cry: O ye works, chant unto the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth, yet remainest ever Virgin, to the astonishment of the choirs above; for thou didst bear the Word, Who was man unaltered by His divinity, and to Whom we sing: O ye works, chant unto the Lord and exalt Him ­supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Who hath exalted the horn of salvation for us in the house of David His child, wherein the Dayspring from on high hath visited us, and directed us to the path of peace.

Blessed be the Lord our God, for He hath glorified His holy hierarch throughout all lands, who gusheth forth streams of wonders, who worketh healing in all the lands of Myra and of the Latins, who visiteth us with mercy.

Thou didst fall into an honorable sleep and didst permit thy body to go to Bari for the good of all; for by thy supplications thou art an ever-vigilant defender for all that call upon thee with faith, O Nicholas.

*Theotokion:* At a loss for words, I am unable to praise thee fittingly, who art higher than the heavenly hosts and more honorable than all creation, who gavest birth to God the Creator in the flesh. Entreat Him, O Theotokos, to have mercy upon us on the day of judgment.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Thy memorial is for us an occasion of festivity this day. The choir of the apostles, the assembly of martyrs and the spirits of the righteous rejoice; and we, the faithful, glorify thee with hymns, crying aloud: O holy hierarch of Christ, deliver us from all sorrows!

Thy most glorious memory hath shown forth upon us, illumining the faithful with splendor, O wise Nicholas, holy hierarch of Christ. Wherefore, we beseech thee: be thou mindful of us all, and deliver us from all the temptations of the adversary by thine intercessions.

*Theotokion:* Mortify our carnal passions and lusts, O pure Theotokos; still the tempest of our passions; calm the tumult of our thoughts; and strengthen the hearts of them that honor thee as their defender, O most pure and blessed one.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Great are thy wonders, O most holy Nicholas, for thou didst appear in a dream to the divinely wise Constantine, and didst save the three generals condemned to death though innocent. Thus do thou save us also from sudden and everlasting death, O most holy Nicholas, hierarch of the Lord.

Glory..., Now & ever...: from the Pentecostarion.

On the Praises, 4 stichera—

*In Tone I:* Having gazed steadfastly upon the noetic heights, and beheld the abyss of hidden wisdom, thou didst enrich the world with thy teachings, O father. Ever pray to Christ in our behalf, O holy hierarch Nicholas.

O man of God, faithful favorite and steward of His mysteries, man of spiritual desires, living pillar and animate image: the Church of Myra received thee with delight as a divine treasure and intercessor for our souls.

*In Tone II:* O holy hierarch Nicholas, Christ God revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith and a model of meekness, for thy divine and worthy deeds shine forth everywhere with splendor, emitting the fragrance of thy myrrh, O intercessor for orphans and widows. Wherefore, pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be saved.

O father Nicholas, the shrine of thy relics overfloweth with myrrh, and thou didst appear to the Emperor in a dream, and by thine apparition didst save from death, bonds and prison the condemned men unjustly sentenced. Now, as then, pray thou for our souls, manifesting thyself in thy presence.

Glory..., in Tone V—

Let us sound the trumpet with the clarion-call of hymns. Let us who keep festival make haste and exult, rejoicing. Let kings and princes hasten to the solemn supplication of our God-bearing father, who appeared to the Emperor in a dreadful dream, commanding him to release the three warriors who were imprisoned without cause. Let the pastors and teachers laud the shepherd who emulated the Good Shepherd. And, assembling, let us praise the physician of the afflicted, the deliverer of those amid misfortunes, the helper of the sinful, the treasure of the poor, the consoler of the sorrowful, the companion of travellers, the pilot of those who sail the seas, who hasteneth everywhere and to everyone most earnestly. And praising the great hierarch, let us say: O most holy Nicholas, go thou before us and deliver us from our present tribulations, and by thy supplications save thou thy flock.

Now & ever...: from the Pentecostarion.

Great Doxology; and after the Trisagion, the troparion of the saint; Glory..., Now & ever...: the troparion from the Pentecostarion.

Litanies, and the dismissal. The faithful are anointed with holy oil from the saint’s lamp. First Hour, and final dismissal.

At the Liturgy, 8 troparia on the Beatitudes: 4 from the appointed ode of the appropriate canon from the Pentecostarion; and 4 from Ode III of the first of the canons of the holy hierarch.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

The saints shall boast in glory and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the Church of the saints.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335

\[Heb. 13: 17-25\]

Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Zion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

