The 10th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Simon the Zealot

*\(for this day we also provide the service in honor of St. Isidora of Tabenna\)*
{{text_align=center}}

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 stichera from the Pentecostarion; and 5 stichera of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

The wondrous Simon, the boast of the apostles, hath passed over the ends of the earth like a brilliant ray, driving away the darkness of polytheism with his saving, brilliant and divine teachings, and hath enlightened all to worship the one Godhead in three Hypostases, indivisible and undivided. *Twice*

The apostle Simon, going about the ends of the earth, whirling about like a wheel, hath burned away the madness of idolatry from all the land; and, shedding the light of piety, he hath kindled luminous rays of grace for the faithful, that they may worship the one Godhead in three Hypostases, indivisible and undivided. *Twice*

The apostle Simon, most radiant and all-wondrous, the teacher of the nations, the net of God drawing us up from the depths of perdition with exalted theology, the true preacher, hath now wisely led all to the knowledge of Christ and set forth his corrections as a beautiful banquet.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Thou wast called the namesake of zeal, O right wondrous Simon, in that thou didst zealously emulate Almighty God, and He showed thee to be full of divine miracles; for, possessing strange zeal, O blessed one, thou wast called the namesake of zeal and didst acquire a title in accordance with thy character. Wherefore, dwelling with the heavenly choirs in the highest, entreat the Word, Christ our God, O God-seer, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the General Epistle of John \[I Jn. 3: 21-4: 6\]

Beloved: if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us.

A Reading from the General Epistle of John \[I Jn. 4: 11-16\]

Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.

A Reading from the General Epistle of John \[I Jn. 4: 20-5: 5\]

Beloved: If a man saith: “I love God,” and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God Whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from Him, That he who loveth God love his brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments: and His commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O ever all-memorable Simon, thou didst drink of the torrent of sweetness, imbibing with divine wisdom the understanding of God which thou didst fervently desire. To Him hast thou now joyously passed over, deified by the all-splendid glory of the Trinity and immeasurable peace.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

O all-wondrous Simon, contemplating the beauty of God, and looking upon it as far as thou art able, delighting therein through a higher union, and deified by His gifts, rejoicing, thou didst reach the only Divine One Whom thou didst desire, O ever all-memorable preacher of Christ, who dwellest now with the angels.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

O most blessed Simon, thou hast shown thyself to be a faithful mediator between God and men; and now, by thy right bold supplications, render Christ merciful to us, and never cease to entreat the Lord, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Like a high flying eagle thou didst soar over creation, O most sacred Simon, disciple and apostle of Christ, and, burning up the falsehood of idolatry with the fiery sound of thy dogmas, thou didst lead the nations out of the depths of ignorance unto the knowledge of God. And now, pray thou to Christ, that He be merciful to us on the day of judgment.

Now & ever…: doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone III—

O holy apostle Simon, entreat the merciful God, that He grant remission of transgressions to our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever… troparion from the Pentecostarion.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory…, that of the apostle; Now & ever…, that from the Pentecostarion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II—

Fishing for the nations, the glorious apostle taught the ends of the earth to worship Thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Christ God. Wherefore, establish Thy Church, and send down Thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful One, Who lovest mankind. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Like the sun, Christ emitted thee like a ray to enlighten all the earth, O glorious apostle Simon; and with thy divine supplications thou dost illumine and enlighten with divine and never-waning light all who celebrate thy holy memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever… sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Polyeleos, and this magnification:

We magnify thee, O holy apostle Simon, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Fishing for reason-endowed fish with the net of thy divine words, thou didst bring the firstfruits thereof to our God; and, desiring to clothe thyself in the wounds of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His suffering. Wherefore, assembling as is meet, we honor thy most festive memory, O glorious apostle, and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 67 \[21: 15-25\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me. Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Manifestly receiving grace from the divine Spirit, becoming a member of the choir of the apostles, and breathing forth with fiery tongue the fiery breath which once was borne down upon them from heaven, O Simon, thou didst utterly consume the thorns of pagan ungodliness. O preacher of Christ God, entreat Him, that our souls be saved.

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the apostle, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the glory of the apostle Simon”, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us send up a hymn to our wondrous God, Who freed Israel from bondage, chanting a song of victory, and crying out: We sing to Thee, our only Master!

Standing in the highest before the Master Who glorified thee and splendidly showed thee forth as His disciple, O wondrous apostle, illumine my soul, that I may hymn thy divine memory.

Bestowing upon thee every abundance of good things, O apostle, Christ, the Summit of divine gifts, Who alone is righteous, showed thee forth by His just judgment, O divinely revealed one.

Thou becamest fiery of spirit, O apostle, receiving the whole radiance of the Spirit Who descended upon thee from heaven; and thou burnest up all the falsehood of idolatry.

*Theotokion:* Showing forth my mortality and corruption to be immortality and incorruption, O Savior, thou madest Thine abode in the womb of the all-pure and holy Virgin who knew not wedlock, conforming Thyself to human nature.

Katavasia from the Pentecostarion

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as the Lord, and none as righteous as our God, Whom all creation doth hymn: There is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!

Thou didst truly recognize the divine mystery of the incarnation, O God-pleasing apostle Simon, receiving transcendent radiance from the Savior Himself.

The unoriginate and ever-existent Word richly illumined thee, His servant, O wondrous Simon, with the splendid effulgence of divine grace.

*Theotokion:* The prophet described thee beforehand, O Theotokos, as a candlestick all of gold, bearing Christ our God, the never-waning Light Who illumineth the world with beams of divinity.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

With the radiant light of the divine Spirit thou didst destroy the darkness of polytheism, didst illumine the hearts of the faithful, singing forth the Savior’s commandments, and didst abolish the fables of the pagans. O glorious Simon, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* With divine sight the prophet perceived Thee, O Word, Who wouldst become incarnate of the only Theotokos, the mountain densely wooded; and with fear He glorified Thy power.

Being wholly a treasury of evangelical gifts, full of grace, O most blessed Simon, thou wast a light for the world and salt to savor the universe.

Thou didst turn away from matters of shameful manifestation, O right wondrous one, and wast vouchsafed to behold the immaterial light of God Who took upon Himself the matter of humanity as a guise.

O Simon, disciple of Life incorruptible, slay thou our living sin with the life-bearing power of the Bestower of life, the activity whereof thou didst receive.

*Theotokion:* Being the peer of Thy Father in essence, Thou wast the peer of men in nature, having received our flesh from the all-pure Virgin, O Master.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by the knowledge of God hast brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, illumine me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Sitting in the upper chamber, O God-seer, thou didst zealously receive the fiery tongue of the Spirit which appeared to thee.

As one exalted, living in the mansions on high, thou hast brought lofty and great doctrines unto us.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O Virgin, the former law hath ceased its effect, grace hath blossomed forth, and righteousness hath shone forth.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O greatly merciful Christ our God, Who clothest Thyself in light as in a garment.

O right wondrous Simon, who hast been called the namesake of zeal, with zeal thou didst emulate the Lord God Almighty.

Giving thee authority, through the activity of His grace the Savior showed thee to be a worker of divine miracles.

*Theotokion:* Let the mouths of the heretics be stopped who do not acknowledge thee to be the Theotokos, O most immaculate one, and let their faces be covered with shame.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

In laudation let us all bless the divinely eloquent Simon, who hath diligently set the doctrines of wisdom in the hearts of the pious; for he standeth now before the throne of glory and dwelleth with the incorporeal ones, praying unceasingly for us all.

*Ikos:* Let us all now praise and piously bless the commemoration of the apostle as a day of salvation, for it shineth forth like the sun upon the whole world, dispelling all darkness with rays of light, and with love illumineth those who celebrate his memory and lovingly honor it. Wherefore, let us hasten with zeal, chanting to him, for he standeth before Christ, praying unceasingly for us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children trampled boldly upon the flame and transformed the fire into dew, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Possessed of strange zeal, O blessed Simon, thou wast called the namesake of zeal, and didst acquire a title in accordance with thy character, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, forever!

Joining chorus before the Word as one who conversed with Him, thou hast found a share of His kingdom, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Of old, through deceit the serpent drove our ancestors from their good inheritance; but thou hast restored it to them, O Mother of God. Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O all-pure one!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* When the musical instruments sounded together and countless people bowed down before the image on the plain of Dura, the three youths, refusing to submit, hymned and glorified the Lord for all ages.

As thy feet are beautiful, O Simon, so is thy tongue fair, which speaketh glory to the Lord and hath taught all to say: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Adorned with radiant beauties, and emitting the splendors of miracles, O Simon, thou wast recognized by the people as a blessed seed. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The human mind is unable to describe thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, and faileth when it doth try to speak of it; for, having conceived, O Virgin, thou gavest birth to God, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye people, with glory let us honor the pure Theotokos, who, without being consumed, received the fire of the Godhead within her womb; and let us magnify her with hymns.

Thou wast revealed to the ends of the world, shining with light; and, having received the fire of the Spirit, thou wast shown to be radiant. Wherefore, we magnify thee.

Having offered thyself wholly to God, thou wast united to Him. Entreat Him now, O divinely manifest one, in behalf of us who praise thee with faith and love.

*Theotokion:* In hymns we magnify the mediatress of the salvation of all who hath appeared to men and illumined the world with the splendors of her divine purity.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

Directing the course of thy beautiful feet to the path of heaven, O apostle Simon, thou didst ascend, rejoicing; and, standing before the Trinity, thou beholdest the Son and the divine Spirit in the Father. Wherefore, we celebrate with faith thine all-sacred and divine memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.

On the Praises, 4 stichera of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you…”—

What shall we call thee, O apostle? Heaven, for thou hast declared the glory of God. A river, for thou dost mystically water creation. A star illumining the Church. A cup pouring forth a holy drink. A most blessed friend of Christ, a dweller with the incorporeal ones. Pray thou for the salvation of our souls. *Twice*.

O Simon, boast of the apostles, thy feet have been adorned which trod well the path of preaching and made narrow all the paths of the enemy with the breadth of thy divine understanding of the Word Who appeared in the coarseness of the flesh and chose thee as His all-glorious disciple, O blessed one. Him do thou beseech, that our souls be saved.

O divinely eloquent apostle Simon, thou wast loosed by Christ as a radiant arrow which woundeth the enemy and manifestly imparteth healing to wounded souls. Wherefore, as is meet, we call thee blessed and celebrate today thy holy solemnity. Pray thou, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, having been signed with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and sent by Him to nations which were perishing, to turn men to the light of the knowledge of God; and having completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and diverse torments, O apostle Simon, thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of Christ. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the Pentecostarion; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 131

\[I Cor. 4: 9-16\]

Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Matthew, §56

\[13: 54-58\]

At that time, Jesus came into His own country, and taught the people in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astounded, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joses and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence hath this man all these things? And they were offended in him, But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

