The 13th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Glyceria

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord…”—

Attending unto the sweet words of the divine Spirit, thou didst forsake all the bitterness of the carnal passions, O divinely blessed Glyceria, and through death thou hast passed over to immortal glory, entreating Christ, that He grant great mercy unto all.

Glyceria was wounded with Thy sweet love, O Master, and endured the bitter pain of wounds, O Word of God. Wherefore, she hath been translated to delight devoid of pain, as one undefiled and incorrupt. Through her supplications, O Word, grant great mercy unto all.

Confessing well the name of Christ thy Bridegroom before the iniquitous enemy, thou didst suffer lawfully for His sake, O honored one, thy members severed by force; and thou didst manfully vanquish the wild beasts. And now thou prayest, that He grant great mercy unto all.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Thy martyr Glyceria, O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I suffer; I am crucified and buried in Thy baptism; I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee, and I die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. Accept me as an unblemished sacrifice, who offer myself to Thee with love!” Through her supplications save our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion from the Pentecostarion.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyr, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

By thy supplications unto God, O Glyceria, deliver me from the bitterness of the passions, that I may hymn thy memory and glorify thy mighty struggles.

Wounded by the love of Christ, with the armor of the Cross thou didst vanquish the enemy and didst receive the crown of victory, O all-praised virgin Glyceria.

Those who offered worship unto stones cast stones at thee as thou didst gaze with thy soul upon the Master, the living Rock, Who hath granted thee victory, O bride of God.

*Theotokion:* Having truly given birth to Him Who is God by nature, bearing Him by divine birthgiving, O pure Theotokos, thou dost truly hear the name which is above every name.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Taking up not shield or spear, but the trophy of the Cross with unwavering faith, thou didst eagerly go forth to battle and mighty struggles against the wiles of the prince of this world.

“Desiring Thee, O Bridegroom, I have no fear of death! Delighting in Thy beauties, I put aside bitterness!” Glyceria truly cried out, rejoicing as she suffered torture and cruel torments.

Suspended by thy hair, lacerated with iron claws, thou didst endure bodily pain, O most honored one, looking forward with purity of mind to the delight which is devoid of pain and the beauty of the Bridegroom.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou alone hast led me, who was slain of old, up to life again, having given birth to the hypostatic Life. And malicious death, striking it, hath manifestly broken asunder.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Loving Mary, the Virgin Theotokos, thou didst preserve thy virginity uncorrupted; and burning with love for the Lord, thou didst suffer with manly mind even unto death. Wherefore, O virgin martyr, Christ God hath crowned thee with a twofold crown.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Splendidly adorned as a bride of Christ in the vesture of thy sacred and wondrous struggles, O virgin, thou hast entered into His incorrupt bridal-chamber, where thou dost delight in His beauty. Yet pray that we who hymn thee with love may be saved from all want.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Depicting Thy divine suffering, O Almighty, Thy divinely wise martyr endured hanging and the pain of wounds.

With the drops of thy blood thou didst quench the fire of vainglory, and the torrents of polytheism were likewise engulfed, O most blessed one.

By the buffeting of thy cheeks thou didst smite the faces of the demons, O martyr, and the shattering of thy face scattered falsehood like dust.

They who wounded the body of thee, who emulated the life of the incorporeal beings, fell dead, smitten by the divine hands of the bodiless ones.

*Theotokion:* Still thou the turmoil of my passions and the tempest of my transgressions, O Bride of God who gavest birth to the Lord and Pilot.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Delighted by the beauties and comeliness of Jesus, the Creator of the good, through sufferings thou didst hasten to the sweet fragrance of His myrrh, burning with desire and afire with His love and radiance, O Glyceria.

Drawing forth a spring of life everlasting from the wellsprings of salvation, thou didst burn with thirst for martyrdom; and, hastening, thou didst run and didst stand, drinking and finding repose through the desire of utmost love, O bride of God.

The angels fed thee heavenly food in prison, O martyr; for thou didst desire the food of peace and the life of the living. Therein thou didst truly stand, arrayed in the wounds of thy suffering, as in robes.

*Theotokion:* As thou hast maternal boldness before thy Son, O most pure one, disdain not thought of thy kinship with us, we pray, for thee alone do we Christians set before the Master, that we might mercifully receive cleansing.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Shining forth from the Western lands like the sun, the martyr illumineth the hearts of the faithful with grace and burneth up legions of dark demons with the rays of her suffering.

Illumined by the rays of the Cross, thou didst escape the darkness of ignorance, O passion-bearer Glyceria, and thou hast enlightened the hearts of those who cry out to thee with faith.

Slain by the spear which pierced her face and head, the glorious martyr shed the skin garments of corruption, O Christ, chanting with thanksgiving to Thee Who gavest her strength over him who tortured her savagely.

*Theotokion:* Bearing a new Child — God Who existeth from before time and became incarnate of thee,— O most immaculate one, cease thou never to pray that He save those who hymn thee.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst sail safely across the deep of suffering, didst calmly pass over the waves of pangs, and didst reach the tranquil havens, propelled by cool divine breezes, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Portraying the persecutions of Paul, O divinely wise one, at the command of the tyrant thou didst often move from city to city, struggling against the princes of darkness; and thou didst attain unto the city on high, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Cast into the furnace, thou wast not consumed; for He Who saved the three youths in Babylon transformed the fire into dew, O all-glorious one.

*Theotokion:* As an animate ark thou didst receive the unoriginate Word; as a holy temple thou didst contain the Creator; and as a fiery throne thou bearest the Master of all creation, O Mother of God.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly thou wast shown to be the most fruitful vine of the Planter of creation, O martyr Glyceria, bearing the grapes of suffering, squeezed in the press of tortures and exuding the wine of compunction for those who chant unto Christ with faith: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With unwavering resolve thou didst endure laceration by the sharp stones cast at thee, O glorious one; and thou didst pursue him who kept watch over thee, binding him with divine bonds when he freed himself from the falsehood of idolatry, and by thy discourse didst rightly lead him to chant as a martyr: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like Daniel thou didst close the mouths of the wild beasts with the divine hymns of thy supplications, O most honored one, and didst quench the fire, denouncing the iniquitous; and with thy mortal body thou didst acquire immortality, emulating the angels, with whom thou dost chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Following thy words, O all-pure one, we bless thee, the blessed one who truly gave birth in the flesh to the blessed Master, the Bestower of light and Giver of life, Who dwelleth in never-waning Light, Whom do ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Thy mind delighted by the vision of God, thou didst preserve thyself and thy much-suffering body devoid of fear, O virgin, when, wounded before the tribunal of the tyrants, thou didst suffer steadfastly, bodily vanquishing the incorporeal foes.

Thou didst betroth thyself to Him Who was born of the divine Virgin Maiden, O incorrupt virgin, and didst bring to Him as a gift thy suffering of multifarious wounds and thine unmerited death, O martyr; wherefore, He hath truly vouchsafed a heavenly bridal-chamber unto thee.

Possessed of golden wings shining with the radiance of the Spirit, O martyr, thou didst soar aloft, adorned with flowers and divine splendors, and hast truly found rest in the very divine habitations of heaven, manifestly enjoying deification.

Thou dancest now in joy with the angels before the face of thy Creator, resplendent in the radiance which ever floweth therefrom. Yet be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy glorious memory with faith, O all-praised passion-bearer Glyceria.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the dwelling-place of God, containing in thy womb the Infinite One, awesomely giving birth to Him Who before was incorporeal, but now is become incarnate. Him do thou beseech, O pure one, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto all who ever magnify thee with faith.

