The 15th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father Pachomius the Great

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside…”—

Extending all thy desire unto God, thou didst forsake the beauty of the world as fleeting, and didst offer thyself unto Christ, O most wise Pachomius, purifying thyself in every way by abstinence, showing forth patient opposition to the burning of the passions; and enduring the torment of thy conscience, O divinely wise one, thou didst receive an imperishable crown as one victorious.

Through active vision thou hast now drawn nigh to union with God, casting from thee the coarse covering of the body, having rejected the passionate attachment of the flesh and become illuminated by His effulgence and grace and divine radiance, and deified at His behest, that thou mightest ascend to that which is higher. And having now become blessed, O God-bearer, entreat Christ with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Having surpassed every sense, thou didst converse with the Master in purity, transcending the flesh, O most honored Pachomius, restraining the passions with higher thought, and destroying the arrogance of the demons, thou didst trample them underfoot. And dwelling now in the mansions of heaven, be thou mindful of all who honor thy memory, entreating Christ with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Having preserved unharmed that which was created according to the image of God, and through fasting made thy mind master over the pernicious passions, thou didst ascend, as far as thou wast able, to that which is in accordance with His likeness; for having manfully done violence to thy nature, thou didst strive to make that which is worse subject to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be the summit of monastics, a desert-dweller, a trainer of those who run the good race, a most excellent model of virtue. And now in the heavens, the reflections having been abolished, O our father Pachomius, thou gazest in purity upon the Holy Trinity, praying directly for those who honor thee with faith and love.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our souls.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, and becamest a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. O Pachomius our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With love do I weave laudation for Pachomius”, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Trusting in the goodness of thy character, as a servant I zealously lift up my voice to thee in hymnody, O divinely eloquent one: With thy radiant effulgence and thine entreaties, O most excellent Pachomius, illumine my mind.

Held fast by a fervent desire for dispassion, O all-blessed father Pachomius, thou didst cause the material waves of the passions to wither away and, soaring aloft with love, thou didst attain unto the effulgence of the Godhead.

O wise one, thou hast filled the ranks of heaven with joy, having come to know the Creator of all creation; for, faithfully instructed by His doctrines, O God-bearer, in thy stronghold thou didst learn of Him Who hath ineffable power.

*Theotokion:* O pure Ever-virgin, thou wast higher than all creation, invisible and visible, for thou gavest birth to the Creator, in that He was well pleased to become incarnate in thy womb. Him do thou beseech with boldness, that He save our souls.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Thou didst run like a deer to water, O venerable one, and having been bathed in holy baptism, didst receive the dew wherewith thy heart was made sweet.

Unable to bear the sight of thine ascetic feats, O venerable God-bearer, the hordes of the demons plagued thee with divers temptations.

As thou didst acquire a sanctified life, thou becamest the law-giver and first leader of fasters, O glorious Pachomius, and didst lead them to Christ, in Whom thy heart was established.

*Theotokion:* The ranks of angels were amazed, and the hearts of men were seized with fear, O all-pure one, at thy birthgiving. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith, O Theotokos.

Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having richly watered thy soul with showers of tears, O wise father, thou didst reap the abundant grain of thy virtues, and as a shepherd of venerable sheep, thou didst feed them on the meadow of abstinence. Wherefore, having departed gloriously from this life, O Pachomius, thou hast joined the choirs of the fathers. Therefore we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

O cloud of the noetic Sun, golden lampstand of the divine Light, O undefiled, pure, immaculate Mistress, I pray: With the radiance of dispassion illumine my soul, which hath been darkened by the blindness of the passions, purify my polluted heart with torrents of compunction and tears of repentance, and cleanse me of the mire of my works, that I may cry out to thee with love: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of transgressions, for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, have pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Pachomius, thou wast an excellent guide for the assemblies of monastics; for through a divine vision thou wast told how to show care for virtue, O venerable father.

Receiving the radiance of the Holy Spirit, thou becamest an all-radiant star shining forth with grace upon all whom thou didst guide to the haven of salvation by thy teachings.

Thy life became an excellent model for monastics, O all-blessed father Pachomius, whereby they now live, following thy divine teachings.

Wounded by love for the Master, by abstinence thou didst extinguish passionate attachment to the flesh, O Pachomius, and didst hallow thy whole life as a sacrifice of sweet savor.

*Theotokion:* All of us, the faithful, know thee to be a haven of salvation and an immovable rampart, O Mistress Theotokos; for by thy supplications thou dost deliver our souls from misfortunes.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou art a Mediator between God and man, O Christ God; for by Thee, O Master, are we led up out of the night of ignorance to Thy Father, the Source of light.

Thou didst communicate the love of God and the teaching of the Spirit, and, enlightened thereby, thou didst receive the perfection of the virtues, setting the state of thy soul free from the passions.

O Master, we set before Thee Thine advocate, asking that, for his sake, we may be illumined with the enlightenment of grace and may ever be preserved by Thy whole armor.

Having strengthened thy mind with the keeping of the commandments, O Pachomius, by thine asceticism thou didst cause the uprisings of the flesh to subside, and wast shown to be a shepherd of the assembly beloved of God.

*Theotokion:* Entreat thy Son and Lord, O pure Virgin, that He grant to captives deliverance from adverse and evil circumstances and peace to those who set their hope on thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Clothed in the power of thy Master and armed with the precious Cross, thou didst trample underfoot the most pernicious wiles of the demons, O father.

Having noetically preferred things eternal to that which passeth away, O venerable one, thou didst endure the pangs of abstinence and becamest an edifier of men’s souls.

Having voluntarily become poor in spirit, O father, thou hast received immortal and immutable delight and ineffable riches in the heavens.

*Theotokion:* Without knowing man, O Virgin, thou gavest birth, yet remainest ever a virgin, showing forth the images of the true divinity of thy Son and God.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Thou wast shown to be a radiant luminary for the ends of the earth, and didst populate the desert with multitudes of monastics, as with cities. And crucifying thyself, taking thy cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst lay waste to thy body with asceticism, praying unceasingly for us all.

*Ikos:* The all-splendid memorial of the blessed one hath been shown to us as another day of salvation, dispelling the deep night of the passions with the radiance of abstinence and shedding brilliant light through his most virtuous activity: and thereon hath a bright and radiant star appeared. With gladness let us faithfully offer hymns to the godly Pachomius, for, looking down from on high, he enlighteneth us and granteth abundant peace, praying unceasingly for us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Arrayed in the strength of the Master, vanquished by love for the life of incorruption, thou didst trample the passionate pleasures of life underfoot like dust; and dwelling now with the choirs of angels, O father, thou dost share therein.

Having acquired a pure heart, thou wast vouchsafed to behold Him Whom none can see; wherefore, thou becamest His blessed minister, O father, hymning the all-glorious Benefactor.

Having acquired Orthodox wisdom, O all-blessed one, thou didst preach the threefold Unity, the consubstantial Trinity, and the awesome incarnation of the Word; and thou didst teach all to hymn the Benefactor as all-glorious forever.

*Theotokion:* O undefiled Virgin, Mother unwedded, we understand thee to be holier than the saints, in that thou alone gavest birth to the immutable God; for by thy divine birthgiving thou hast poured forth incorruption upon all the faithful.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

At the divine command, O wise one, thou didst manifestly learn from the angel the habit of fasters, wherein the children of piety are now nurtured, who cry out in hymns: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thy life of asceticism, resplendent with great radiance like that of lightning, O most wise one, hath shone forth upon all who cry out to the Creator with piety: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Glorifying Thee Who wast ineffably begotten before time of the unbegotten Father, O Christ, the glorious Pachomius preached Thee and the most Holy Spirit, knowing the one nature and Godhead of the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, in piety we call thee the portal of the Light, for in manner transcending nature thou gavest birth to the Effulgence of the Father, Who united Himself to the coarseness of the flesh, O all-pure one. Him do all of us, the works of the Lord, hymn as Lord.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Illumined with rays of grace, O Pachomius, thou standest before God as a faithful minister, vouchsafed to delight in ineluctable glory. Wherefore, we magnify thine honored festival.

A wreath was woven as for a victor by the life-bearing right hand of the Almighty, O Pachomius; and now, O blessed one, do thou vouchsafe that those who hymn thy glorious memory may receive remission of offenses, O ever all-memorable one.

Embracing now the fruits of thy pangs, O Pachomius, thou delightest in joy which passeth understanding. By thy mediation entreat Christ to deliver thy disciples, who now glorify and honor thee, O right glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Receiving the Rain of heaven in thy womb like the fleece received the dew, O all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to Him Who granteth food to us who piously hymn Him and confess thee to be the most hymned Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—

Desiring the life of the angels, thou didst withdraw into the deserts and didst subdue the carnal passions, showing thyself to be angelic, O God-bearing Pachomius. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O Pachomius our father, we honor thee as the guide of a multitude of monks; for following thy steps we have truly come to know how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O conversor with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the Pentecostarion; and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the venerable one.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Corinthians, §176

\[II Cor. 4: 6-15\]

Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We, having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 77

\[Lk. 14: 25-35\]

At that time, great multitudes went with Jesus: and He turned, and said unto them, If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after Me, cannot be my disciple. For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish. Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an embassy, and desireth conditions of peace. So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be My disciple. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; but men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

