The 18th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Theodotus of Ancyra

& the Seven Holy Virgins

the Holy Martyrs Peter, Dionysius & Those with Them

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Adorned with a peaceful disposition, thou wast chosen in holiness to minister unto all, O all-blessed Theodotus, and illumined with the crown of suffering, thou joinest chorus in the heavens with those who suffered with thee. With them do thou pray, that we be saved.

Having offered thyself to the Lord as a sacred vessel, and submitted to His words, O divinely blessed one, thou didst generously give to the poor, O wise martyr, noetically and spiritually laying up for thyself the riches of martyrdom, which cannot be taken away.

Behold the river of salvation! Behold the living wellspring, which the company of holy virgins hath been shown to be! Wherefore, come ye fervently: Let us who are sick now draw forth healing, and let those in sorrow draw forth joy, through the supplications of the holy brides of Christ!

And 3 stichera of the martyrs, in Tone IV, Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Illumined with the radiance of the three-Sunned Godhead, ye passed through the darkness of tortures and have been shown to be brilliant stars, the divine confirmation of the Church, ever shedding light, O holy martyrs. Wherefore, bowing down before your relics and the dust of your bodies, we celebrate your splendid festival.

O ye faithful, with joy let us all now bless Peter and Dionysius, Paul, Andrew and Benedimus, who were valiant and firm, Christina, Heraclius and Paulinus, who suffered steadfastly, the three together, trampled all the wiles of the serpent underfoot and dispelled the darkness of idolatry with grace.

With your blood, O blessed ones, ye purchased the immovable kingdom of God, and ye attained unto the calm havens, having endured all the threefold waves of evils with manly mind, O ye who are blessed of God. Wherefore, ye are called blessed and are glorified by all, praying ever, that we find mercy on the day of judgment.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

AT MATINS

Ode I

Canon of the martyr & the holy women, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* Let us chant a hymn of victory unto the Lord, Who all-gloriously engulfed Pharaoh in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

Let us sing unto the Lord, Who hath strengthened human weakness against the invisible foe and crowned it with victories!

Receiving a victory bestowed by God, O glorious athlete Theodotus, thou wast shown to be unvanquished by the adversaries, conquering them.

Adorned with the beauty of divine purity, O virgins, ye entered the tribunal as it were a bridal-chamber, hymning Christ the Bridegroom.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, all of us who glorify thee with love as the Mother of the God of all have all come to share in divine glory.

Canon of the martyrs, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

O champions of the Faith, from sufferings and every evil circumstance do ye deliver those who with faith ever celebrate your sacred memory.

All-gloriously propelled by the mast and sail of the Cross, O God-bearers, ye navigated the depths of tortures without sinking, drowning the enemy.

Ye have joined the ranks of heaven, enduring wounds in your bodies, O holy ones; wherefore, we honor your divine memory today.

Made steadfast by the law of God, O wise ones, suffering lawfully ye set at nought the counsels of the iniquitous and have received divine glory.

*Theotokion:* As the throne of the King, whereon He sat, O Virgin, thou hast prepared a heavenly seat for the faithful. And we honor and glorify thee with love.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* My heart hath been established in the Lord my God; wherefore, the strengthless have girded themselves with power.

Strengthened in the Lord thy God, O martyr Theodotus, with truth thou didst cast down the adverse foe.

Having set aside the coarseness of the flesh through abstinence, O passion-bearers, ye soared aloft to the heights of martyrdom.

Not inclining your ears to the blandishments of the enemy, ye suffered lawfully, obedient to the laws of God.

*Theotokion:* Established upon a rock by hope in thee, O Virgin, we are in nowise shaken by the threefold waves of temptations.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Having set the feet of thy soul upon the rock of the Faith, O blessed and all-blessed Peter, thou wast not vanquished by the opposition of the ungodly.

Thy city, O Peter, setteth thee before the world as a radiant star dispelling the night of ungodliness with divine grace.

Crushed by wheels of torture and heavy bonds, and beaten unceasingly, O Peter, thou wast shown to be a crown-bearer, strengthened by looking toward God.

Offering hymnody to God, O passion-bearers, ye endured every application of torture; wherefore, ye have been vouchsafed crowns.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother and Theotokos, who alone remainest virgin after birthgiving, thou hast truly been shown to be the servant of the great mystery, having giving birth to God.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Having been anointed by the divine Spirit, O glorious one, thou becamest the servant of all, and having suffered steadfastly, thou hast been greatly glorified. Wherefore, assembling, O Theodotus, we honor thee, celebrating thy holy memorial with faith, whereon do thou save all by thy supplications.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in the same melody—

Adorned with the blood of martyrdom, ye stand before the King and Lord of all, O right victorious martyrs. Wherefore, with gladness we celebrate your honored memory today, asking that through you we may receive remission of our debts and great mercy.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion—

O most immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to the transcendent God: with the incorporeal ones do thou unceasingly pray, that before the end He grant remission of transgressions and correction of life to us who with faith and love hymn thee as is meet, O thou who alone art most hymned.

Stavrotheotokion—

When Thine all-pure Mother beheld Thee, O Word of God, suspended on the Cross, she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and strange mystery, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death, desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* I have heard of Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, how Thou wast born of the Virgin, that Thou mightest save from deception those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having drowned the tyrant in the blood of thy martyrdom as in the sea, O martyr, thou dwellest in delight incorruptible, hymning Christ, the Bestower of crowns.

The right laudable choir of passion-bearers, the seven wise virgins, hath shone forth in the divine bridal-chamber of Christ, having lighted their most radiant lamps.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as their noetic crown, O Virgin, the virgin passion-bearers boast in thee, hymning thy Son and God, the Bridegroom and Master.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Having shaken off slumber from the eyelids of your souls and slothfulness with divine vigilance, ye lulled to sleep all the evil intentions of the ungodly.

Slain by stoning, Andrew, Paul and Dionysius have been vouchsafed life everlasting, as all-precious and divine stones of the Word.

With faith let us praise the martyrs today: the all-comely flowering of piety, the divine fragrance of Christ.

Having disdained things below by desire for that which is divine, and valiantly endured pain in their flesh, rejoicing, they passed over to the life which is devoid of pain.

*Theotokion:* O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, from every evil circumstance, from misfortunes and tribulations save those who hymn and set their hope in thee.

Ode V

Canon of the martyr and virgins

*Irmos:* Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God, Who hast shone forth the light, hast illumined the morning, and made manifest the day!

Pouring forth the wise of doctrine from the cup of thy soul, O wise and glorious Theodotus, thou hast gladdened the hearts of the pious.

Drinking in the dew of abstinence, the honored ones noetically put forth flowers of purity and have shown themselves to be the sweet fragrance of Christ.

Treating the pangs of the flesh as delight for the sake of the Lord’s love, the virgins suffered valiantly for His sake.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the deception of demonic idolatry by thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, we hymn thee, the cause and mediatress of good things.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Sealed with noetic light, O martyrs, with divine power ye traversed the darkness of martyrdom and the evil night of polytheism without stumbling.

Resplendent with the beauties of virginity, O Christina, thou wast splendidly adorned with radiant wounds, and, rejoicing, hast made thine abode in the noetic bridal-chamber of Christ.

They who cruelly desired thy body, O martyr Christina, suffered mightily, bound to the desire of God by thy sweet discourse.

*Theotokion:* O unwedded Bride of God, thanks to whom we have been released from our ancient debt, we have been shown to be children of the heavenly father by grace. Preserve us who hymn thee!

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* As Thou didst deliver the Prophet Jonah from the sea monster, O Christ God, so do Thou lead me up from the depths of my transgressions, and save me, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Finding thee to be a divine haven, O Theodotus, the faithful fended off the threefold waves of the ungodly, hymning Christ the Helmsman.

With love for the Creator the passion-bearers strengthened their natural weakness and for Him bore well supernatural struggles.

Having lighted the divers lamps of your seven-branched lampstand, O virgins, ye entered the arena of martyrdom as it were a bridal-chamber.

*Theotokion:* The earth and those who dwell thereon have been delivered from the ancient curse by thy birthgiving, O Virgin. Thee do we ever glorify as the cause of blessing.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Having contended, the glorious Heraclius received great glory, becoming a citizen of paradise, and, having joined the honored choirs of athletes, he now rejoiceth.

Let us hymn the godly Benedimus and Andrew with Paulinus, Heraclius and Dionysius, Peter, Paul and Christina, the martyrs of the Lord.

Cut asunder, unjustly stoned, slain in the fire, O glorious martyrs, ye have been vouchsafed to live in the Church of the firstborn.

Shining forth like stars in the firmament of the Church, the all-wise passion-bearers chanted piously to Him Who had shown them forth: “Let us worship the Son of God!”

*Theotokion:* Like a meadow, O Virgin, thou didst produce the fertile Grain of life Who nourisheth the faithful with life and doth truly banish famine from the earth.

Kontakion of the martyr & virgins, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Having struggled well as an athlete, O Theodotus, with the athletes and the passion-bearing virgins thou hast received crowns of honor. Wherefore, entreat ye Christ God unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who spake on the mountain with Moses and revealed an image of the Virgin in the bush.

Denouncing the wiles of the enemy with spiritual wisdom, O passion-bearer, thou didst save the martyrs who suffered with thee from their delusion.

Giving wings to your thoughts with love of incorrupt good things, O virgin, through struggles ye entered in unto them, hymning Christ.

In nowise inclining toward the lies of the author of evils, O glorious passion-bearers, ye kept the commandment of the Creator inviolate.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, do thou ever entreat Him Who was born of thee, that those who hymn thee may behold His glory and delight therein with the martyrs.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Emulating in faith the young children in Babylon, O blessed ones, ye eagerly entered the fire, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Rejecting graven images, ye did not worship them, O glorious athletes, and endured an ever-memorable death, manifestly receiving immortal delights.

With manliness of soul and strength of character the martyrs cast down the arrogance of the iniquitous, crying out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Strengthened by the words of the godly martyrs, O all-glorious Paulinus, thou didst elect to die, crying out to Him Who created all things: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O ye faithful, in hymnody let us all glorify the Theotokos, the ark of God, the jar of the divine Manna, the golden lampstand, the table, the holy mountain.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* Christ the King did the captive children confess, proclaiming with a loud voice in the furnace: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having Christ our Benefactor ever preserving and strengthening thee in all amid the pangs of suffering, O Theodotus, thou didst undertake ­supernatural struggles, hymning God the King.

The goodly virgins, sweetening their souls with the good pleasure of Christ, hastened after Him, suffering valiantly, and in joy they cried: “Thee do we exalt supremely, O Christ, forever!”

O Word, Thou Creator of all things, as God Thou hast strengthened the weakness of women’s nature in sufferings; wherefore, having struggled well, the holy ones hymned Thee, God the King.

*Theotokion:* As God, the Creator Who loveth mankind, He Who renewed human nature took on humanity from thee and restored the nature of us who confess thee to be the true Theotokos.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

With the shedding of their bodies of clay, the athletes were clothed in vesture woven of heavenly grace, crying out with love: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

Purified by the sprinkling of the divine Blood, O martyrs, ye poured forth your blood for Christ, chanting unceasingly: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

O blessed ones, ye were shown to be comely grapes of the noetic Vine, exuding the wine of piety for us who cry out with love: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou hast been a noetic mercy-seat, receiving the supplications of all and bearing them to thy Son, unto the deliverance of those who chant: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyr & Virgins

*Irmos:* Christ our God, to Whom thou gavest birth without seed, O pure Theotokos, do we magnify with unceasing hymns.

O glorious Theodotus, with the power of the Spirit thou didst vanquish the hordes of falsehood and hast received the crown of victory.

Breathing forth miracles like ointment, O Theodotus, thou dost perfume all who glorify thee with faith and love.

Lighting your seven-lamped beacon, O honored ones, guide us to Christ God, the never-waning Light.

*Theotokion:* The desire of thee, which surpasseth all love, O all-pure one, leadeth me to cry out to thee without ceasing: Rejoice, O Mistress!

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Sacrificing themselves with desire, the valiant martyrs eagerly shed their blood, rejoicing, and have received riches which cannot be taken away; and the most lauded ones have joined the choirs of the martyrs.

Ye were shown to be noetic flowers spreading the perfume of piety, passion-bearers and citizens of the city of God, havens of salvation for the bestormed, beacons and champions of the Truth; wherefore, ye are blessed as is meet.

Let us honor the wise Heraclius with Peter and Paul, Paulinus and Benedimus, together with Andrew, Christina and Dionysius, who suffered mightily for Christ and destroyed falsehood.

The ground received your blood, which was shed for the Benefactor of all, O ye of great renown, and the habitations of the just have received your souls. Joining chorus with them, be ye mindful of those who ever commemorate you.

*Theotokion:* With joy do we, the faithful, offer thee the cry of the angel, O Bride of God: Rejoice, O helper of men, confirmation of the martyrs and apostles, proclamation of all the prophets, O most immaculate Theotokos.

