The 22nd Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Basiliscus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Reigning like a king, thou didst receive the kingdom which abideth forever, O glorious Basiliscus, and thou standest before the King of hosts, rejoicing with all the armies of the angels. And with them, O blessed one, thou dost unceasingly chant divine hymnody, radiantly illumined by splendors and divine communion.

When, rejoicing, thou didst walk the path of martyrdom, O all-praised one, they pierced thy feet with nails, binding them fast; and therewith thou didst trample upon the head of the enemy and didst utterly crush it, O glorious one, and thou didst mightily tread the paths of heaven, showing thyself to the Master as a victor.

Thy supplication first caused a barren tree to put forth fruit, and a spring to put forth living water; by the fountain of thy blood the earth was sanctified, and the air was hallowed by the passage of thy soul, O thou who art most rich. Wherefore, with faith, O Basiliscus, we celebrate thy holy and most festive day, whereon thou didst struggle lawfully.

But if Alleluia is to be chanted instead of “God is the Lord…” at matins, before the foregoing stichera of the martyr we chant the following stichera of the Theotokos, in the same tone & melody—

O all-holy Bride of God, deliver my lowly soul from condemnation and grievous transgressions, and by thy supplications rescue me from death and grant that on the day of trial I may receive the justification which the assemblies of the saints have received; and show me forth as cleansed before the end by repentance and outpourings of tears.

With the showers of the all-holy Spirit, O all-pure one, bedew thou my mind, O thou who gavest birth to Christ, the Drop Who by His compassions hath utterly washed away the countless iniquities of men; and dry up the wellspring of my passions, and ever vouchsafe unto me a torrent of living sustenance by thy supplications.

O Virgin who gavest birth to God my Savior, by thy supplications grant unto me the excellent and saving cure of repentance, torrents of tears, the thought of the dread and awesome hour and the inexorable judgment, that I may escape terrifying torment and may receive divine grace.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Ten thousands of times have I promised to repent of mine offenses, O all-pure one, yet the cherished habit of mine evils will not depart from me; wherefore, I cry unto thee and fall down, praying: O Mistress, rescue me from such tyranny, guiding me to things that are higher, which are nigh unto salvation.

Stavrotheotokion—

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee maternally: “O my Son most desired! How is it that Thou hast been suspended upon the tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How have Thy hands and feet been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, O Word? How hast Thou shed Thy blood, O Master?”

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is “I, Joseph, praise Basiliscus all-great”, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us send up a hymn unto our wondrous God, Who freed Israel from bondage, singing and crying out a hymn of victory unto Thee Who alone art Master.

O much suffering martyr, entreat Christ the King, that He save those who piously praise this thy splendid festival, that they may come to share in the kingdom of heaven.

Wholly strengthened by the love of Christ, O thou who art all rich, thou didst hold the flesh in contempt as that which would become corrupt, and didst endure tortures, denouncing the falsehood of idolatry in thy manliness.

Illumined by the enlightenment of the all-holy Spirit, thou didst pass through the night of ignorance, O Basiliscus, and through the radiance of sufferings wast shown to be like the sun, splendidly illumining all creation.

*Theotokion:* Gideon foretold that thine all-pure womb would be like a fleece, receiving the Dew of heaven Who drieth up the sea of ungodliness and giveth drink to those who yearn for understanding, O Maiden.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

With the blood of martyrdom thou didst extinguish the conflagration of idolatry, O martyr, and, rejoicing, thou delightest in a torrent of sustenance.

The two chosen athletes, leaving thee, the martyr of the Trinity, behind, departed unto Christ.

Having departed from thy body, thou didst await those who suffered with thee, confessing Christ the Lord, the King of all, O much suffering Basiliscus.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, let me ever have thee guiding me toward the virtues and leading me to the ways of repentance.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Thou standest now, rejoicing, before the one King, sacredly arrayed in a splendid diadem and in vesture empurpled by thy blood, and deified by pure communion. Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy memory today, we hymn thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou unceasingly entreat God Who was born of thee in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto all who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd hanging, dead, upon the Tree, exclaimed, weeping and crying out maternally: “How can I fear Thy condescension which is past recounting, O my Son, and Thy voluntary sufferings, O all-good God?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Having worked the soil of thy soul as with a plough, O martyr, thou didst produce the grain of suffering an hundredfold, storing it up in the granaries of God.

Thou didst hear a sacred voice from on high, O all-blessed one, announcing to thee the end of thy suffering and enrolling thee in the choirs of the martyrs.

Showing steadfast opposition, O glorious one, thou didst endure to be fettered with chains, loosing every bond of falsehood.

With the cords of thy divine pangs, O passion-bearer, thou didst strangle Satan; wherefore, thou hast been adorned with the crown of victory, O martyr Basiliscus.

*Theotokion:* He Who is consubstantial with the Father, becoming incarnate of thy blood, as He was well pleased, O most immaculate one, showed Himself to be like unto men in all things.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Led by the power of the Spirit to suffer lawfully, O divinely wise martyr, thou didst put the iniquitous to shame.

Having boldly trodden the path of martyrdom, O glorious one, thou didst shatter the darts of the enemy.

The nails which were driven through thy feet, O divinely wise one, utterly crushed the head of the adverse foe.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou gavest birth to the incomprehensible and unapproachable God in the guise of the flesh.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Preaching Him Who had been lifted up upon the Tree, thou wast bound to a dry tree; yet by the raining of thy supplications thou didst show it forth as well watered, fully adorned with leaves, for the confirmation of the pious and to the glory of thy pangs, O Basiliscus.

The iniquitous unjustly bound thee who had been freed from the carnal passions, and with nails of iron they pierced thee and forced thee to make a long march, thereby sanctifying all the ground with thy blood, O much suffering martyr.

Standing with thy hands bound, thou didst lift up the eyes of thy heart to God, and didst entreat Him to cause a spring of living water to pour forth for thy most glorious memory and the healing of men’s souls, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou my broken and wretched soul of its habitual passions, O Virgin, for thou didst ineffably give birth to the Physician of souls and bodies, and save me who set my hope on thee, O most immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

Thou wast shown to be mighty and manly in suffering and all-wondrous in miracles, and, manifestly bearing forth the name of Christ, thou didst put the tyrant to shame. Wherefore, we honor thee, O most honored Basiliscus, ever crying: Rejoice, O splendid adornment of martyrs!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou wast shown to be the adornment of the martyrs, O all-blessed one, and, dwelling in the all-splendid habitations, by thy supplications drive the storm of the world away from us who honor thee with love.

Thou wast shown to be the habitation of the Trinity, O wise one, casting down the temples of the idols and chanting to the Master: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

The Master bestowed honor upon thee when thou didst suffer mightily, setting at nought the machinations of the enemy and singing melodiously: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou wast shown to be a second firmament, O Basiliscus, having acquired thy martyrdom like the sun and the sacred radiance and fullness of thy miracles like stars forever.

*Theotokion:* Behold the Virgin of whom the great Isaiah, through the divine Spirit, said that she would conceive God in her womb and give birth to Him. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a victor over tyrants and the spirits of evil, O glorious one, unceasingly chanting unto Him Who strengthened thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Thou didst die unto the world, steadfastly following the Master Who hath breathed life into the dead, O glorious martyr Basiliscus, and thou chantest: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Enduring the torturing of thy body with steadfastness of soul, O divinely wise one, thou joinest chorus with the divine and incorporeal angels, offering praise to God and crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more spacious than the heavens, O all-holy Maiden, having contained within thy womb Him Who delivereth from the constraint of the evil one all who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Having traversed the storm of martyrdom with the sail of the Cross, thou didst attain unto the calm haven of the kingdom, and like a good merchant thou didst save the freight of piety for Christ our God, the King of all.

As of old Elijah the Tishbite called down fire from heaven, O blessed one, so didst thou call down flame by thy supplication, whereby thou didst utterly consume the fame of the idols and didst burn the temples of the demons. And God the Creator is magnified.

When thou didst depart thy body through beheading by the sword, the wise hosts received thy godly spirit which had vanquished the cruel evil spirit by grace, O thou who art most rich; and now thou dwellest as a victor of the kingdom in the highest, O Basiliscus.

The earth was sanctified by thy burial and heaven by thy soul, O divinely inspired one; for, arrayed in a splendid robe dyed purple in thy blood, thou reignest forever with Christ our God, being ever mindful of those who commemorate thee.

*Theotokion:* Though Thou wast God by nature, yet didst Thou endure to be clothed in man, willingly making Thine abode in the womb of the immaculate one, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, knowing that Thou hast volitions corresponding to Thy two natures, we magnify Thee, blessing Thy Mother with faith.

