The 29th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyred Virgin Theodosia

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious ­wonder…”—

Shining with the radiance of virginity, O honored Theodosia, and splendidly adorned with a royal robe dyed in the blood of martyrdom, O most wise one, thou madest thine abode in the heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ, and dost dance with the angelic ranks in perpetual chorus, O glorious and most immaculate maiden.

O virgin martyr, most lauded Theodosia, desiring Christ with all thy soul, thou didst endure the wounds of martyrdom, courageously enduring lacerations for Him Whom thou didst love, thy sides raked with iron claws. O the steadfast opposition of thy struggles, whereby thou didst truly cast the prideful one down to the ground!

Splendidly adorned with beauty of body and soul, thou didst bring thyself to Christ, desiring to be crowned by Him with a wreath of glory, O most glorious martyr Theodosia, and manifestly to receive upon thy brow, as is meet, the truly priceless diadem of the kingdom, having been shown to be an incorrupt bride, O thou who art most wise.

But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord…”, we sing first the following stichera of the Theotokos, in the same tone & melody—

Rejoice, O enlightenment of men’s souls, forgiveness of offenders, correction of the indifferent! Rejoice, O consolation and joy, helper of the sorrowful! Rejoice, O good one, thou healing of the souls of the infirm! Rejoice, O reconciler and mediator for us before God, O pure one who art more holy than all the seraphim!

Receiving flesh from thy blood, the preëternal God showed thee forth unto men, O pure one. Wherefore, deliver thy servants from all misfortunes and evil circumstances, and from the snares of the wicked foe, and vouchsafe that all who glorify and do thee homage may partake of the effulgence of the elect.

Save me, O all-pure Mistress, who gavest birth ineffably unto Christ the Savior, for thee alone have I acquired as an intercessor and an unassailable rampart, my protection and joy, the divine consolation of my soul. Wherefore, deliver me from the worm which sleepeth not and from everlasting fire, O Mother of Christ God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Let me magnify thee with joyful cries, O pure one, and glorify the abyss of thy love for mankind. Save me from misfortunes, and rescue me from the soul-destroying darts of the invisible and most evil foe; for I wield thee against him as a firm and invincible weapon, O divine Bride, Mother of Christ God.

Stavrotheotokion—

“What is this sight which I see, which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who upholdest all creation hast been lifted up upon a Tree, and Thou diest, imparting life unto all!” weeping, the Theotokos said when she beheld the God and man, Who had shone forth from her ineffably, suspended upon the Cross.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Thou didst right pleasingly attain unto virtue, O martyr, and becamest a pure habitation of Christ, the beloved abode of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, suffering well, thou didst put to shame the enemy who wageth war upon the human race, and didst cut down Copronymus with the sword of the Faith, O Theodosia; and, rejoicing, thou hast passed over to the heavenly bridal-chamber. Ask thou great mercy for those who ever honor thee with faith.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyred virgin, the acrostic whereof is: “I sing the glory of the martyr Theodosia”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

God Who of His own will ascended the Cross, became for thee the path of suffering, and, casting down the tyrant, He made him like unto a bird for the martyrs to make sport of.

On earth, O most honored Theodosia, thou didst right mightily smite the prince of falsehood, suffering mightily, O most lauded martyr, and thou didst receive a crown of glory as one victorious.

He who of old was overweening in his pride hath now been cast down, struck a blow by thy patience, O martyr; for, having received the powers of the Cross, thou didst put to shame him who was boundlessly arrogant.

*Theotokion:* Wickedly did the serpent deceive me, making me captive, instilling in me the desire to become a god; but called by thee, O all-pure one, I have truly been immutably deified.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Divine desire showed thee to be an honored bride, O Theodosia, a martyr of Christ, who loved His Cross.

Having forsaken the corrupting thought of the flesh, O honored and all-glorious Theodosia, thou dwellest with the life-creating Spirit.

By thy divine gift of grace, O honored one, heal thou my mind and cure my soul, which hath been made impotent by the passions.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast restored my fallen countenance, O pure Mistress who gavest birth to the Prince, the Resurrection of us all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Truly drowning all the might of the wicked devil in the streams of thy blood, O glorious one, thou didst pass unharmed over the great abyss of torments, and hast manifestly made thine abode in the holy land, receiving the reward of thy labors as is meet; and thou hast been vouchsafed entry into the bridal-chamber of heaven, O all-lauded Theodosia. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Let us hymn the portal and ark of heaven, the all-holy mountain, the radiant cloud, the bush unburned, the noetic paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of the whole world, for within her was the salvation of the world and the remission of the ancient transgressions wrought. Wherefore, let us cry out to her: Entreat thy Son, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who piously worship thy most holy birthgiving.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, have pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The accursed tyrant desired in his arrogance to frighten the might of thine endurance with wounds, but thou, O all-lauded one, didst cry aloud: “Glory to my God!”

Thou wast providentially enriched with a divinely bestowed and godly name, O martyr and passion-bearer; for thou becamest a gift of God which gladdeneth us who honor thee with faith and love.

Arrayed in vesture adorned with the blood of thy martyrdom as with dye, O divinely wise Theodosia, thou didst cry out to thy Bridegroom with love: “I hasten after Thee!”

*Theotokion:* Thou didst divinely give birth to the incarnate Word, O pure Virgin, and remainest a virgin. Wherefore, with steadfast faith and unceasing voices we cry out to thee: “Rejoice, O Mistress!”

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Loving Christ, the Myrrh Who was poured forth, O maiden, with divine wisdom thou didst follow after Him, glorifying Him with hymns.

The martyr traded this transitory life for life everlasting, and inherited the kingdom of heaven in exchange for a little blood.

Like fountains and springs the healing relics of the martyr pour forth cures upon the infirm and through faith heal afflictions of soul.

*Theotokion:* Who can describe thy mystery, O most immaculate one? For thou didst contain within thy womb the Creator Who cannot be contained by anything.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Following Thee, O Christ, the martyr Theodosia eagerly accepted death, undaunted by the threats of the tyrants, and she emulated Thy voluntary suffering.

Readily strengthened by Thy Cross, O Savior, women trample upon the heads of serpents, as Thou didst foretell, for they are wounded by the love and divine desire of Thee.

*Theotokion:* Finding thee to be a wholly perfect and all-comely turtle-dove, a blossom and lily of the valley, O Mother of God, the noetic Bridegroom made His abode within thee.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Through labors thou didst attain unto the life abounding in ease, O martyr, and with thy blood thou didst choke Copronymus, the enemy of the Church of Christ, O most blessed Theodosia; and thou dost rejoice with the armies on high, protecting those who honor thy memory.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Gazing with faith upon thee who art adorned with divinely given beauties, O martyr, in hymnody we splendidly cry out to thy Bridegroom: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Rejoicing now with the virgins bearing lamps, O martyr, thou hast now entered into the heavenly bridal-chamber with Christ, crying: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* He Who sitteth upon an all-exalted throne hath rested upon thee, finding thee to be a throne fit for God on earth, O Virgin. Blessed art Thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Released from the bonds of the flesh, O honored Theodosia, thou didst soar aloft, rejoicing, to the splendid bridal-chamber, joining chorus with the bridal choirs, resplendent in the scarlet blood of martyrdom, and crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou hast been vouchsafed to live in splendor in the heavenly bridal-chamber, O honorable and ever all-memorable Theodosia, having acquired everlasting glory, truly enriched with the fruit of thy courage, and crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast manifestly adorned, in accordance with thy name, O honored Theodosia; for in thee hath an excellent divine gift been given to us, O most wise one, giving forth rivers of gifts which pass understanding to those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Having truly given birth unto God, thou hast been truly called the all-pure Mother of God, truly bearing a divine name according to thy birthgiving. Wherefore, with divine wisdom we, the faithful, glorify thee as the Theotokos, O most immaculate Mistress.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

By thine entreaties loose thou the bonds of the offenses from those who piously hymn thee, O divinely wise, most honored and all-lauded martyr Theodosia, standing before God Almighty.

Deified through gazing upon God, thou hast attained the artful desire of Eve, our first mother, becoming a god through divine communion. Wherefore, we magnify thee, O most blessed Theodosia.

Christ, thy Bridegroom, is all sweetness, all spiritual consolation, O martyr and passion-bearer Theodosia. As thou delightest in Him now, remember us in thy supplications.

*Theotokion:* He Who hath adorned all things by His word, desiring to come in the flesh, made His abode in thee alone, having found thee to be more holy than all others; and He hath shown thee to be the true Theotokos, O Virgin Mother.

