The 30th Day of the MONTH OF MAY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father Isaacius of the Monastery of Dalmatus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Beholding the beauties of paradise, and richly delighting in the flowers of incorruption, thou didst bud forth for the world the knowledge of God, partaking whereof with spiritual love, O venerable Isaacius, we cause our souls to grow.

Protecting thy body with abstinence, O father, with thy prayers and vigils thou didst mortify the uprisings of the passions. Wherefore, the power of the Spirit within thee, covering thee, showed thee to be a noetic and universal luminary.

Shining forth upon the city from the desert like the sun, O father, thou didst adorn the monastic life; wherefore, with thy teachings thou hast enlightened the faithful to bless the Father and the Son, and the consubstantial Spirit.

If Alleluia is chanted instead of “God is the Lord…”, we chant the following stichera to the Theotokos first, in the same tone & melody—

Though we are beset by hopeless falls, O pure Virgin, yet do we have thee alone as our intercessor, and we cry aloud in thanks­giving: Cleanse us, O all-holy Bride of God, for thou art the refuge of the world and the help of our race.

With the rod of thine intercession, O pure Theotokos, quickly drive the bestial passions away from my wretched soul, guiding my life in peace; and reckon me among the holy flock of thy chosen sheep.

Drowning in the abyss of offenses, yet fleeing to the calm haven of thine all-pure prayer, O Theotokos, I cry out to thee: Save me, giving unto thy servant thy mighty right hand, O all-immaculate one!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having stumbled in my corrupt morals, I lie prostrate on the ground, yet do I hasten to thy serenity, O Virgin. Deliver me from the storm of the adversary and from multifarious temptations, that I may unceasingly hymn thy goodness, O Ever-virgin Mother and Theotokos.

Stavrotheotokion—

Standing at the foot of the Cross of Thy Son and God, and gazing upon His long-suffering, thou didst say, weeping, O pure Mother: “Woe is me, O my Child most sweet! How is it that thou sufferest these things undeservedly, O Word of God, that Thou mayest save mankind?”

AT MATINS

Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou didst deliver Israel from slavery with Thy mighty right hand. Save Thou us now, as Thou didst save them.

Having arrived from the confines of the wilderness, O venerable and holy one, thou didst make firm the Faith of Christ, scattering the assembly of heretics.

Thou wast in nowise ashamed to address the emperor as Nathan did David, O glorious one, desiring to make steadfast the Church of Christ.

Cast into the mire by the deceived, O all-praised and glorious one, thou didst shine forth like a pearl lustrous with the splendor of the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Having conceived the Timeless Son Who was begotten of the Father, O all-pure and immaculate Virgin, thou gavest birth to Him as a babe.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Word, Who established the heavens by Thy word, make steadfast our minds and hearts, that we may glorify Thee, the Savior of our souls.

Thou wast shown to be a noetic clarion, O father, summoning all as to battle, to stand against the hordes of the enemy with the help of Christ the Savior.

Thou wast shown to be a noetic ladder, O God-bearer, leading to the kingdom on high those who mount it with faith and are made steadfast in the Spirit by thy teachings.

Thou wast revealed as a mountain of doctrine by the love of the Master, O God-bearer, gathering into the Church of Christ all who have cleaved unto Him through the virtues.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast truly shown to be a Mother, O Virgin, giving birth to Emmanuel, God the Word. Him do thou beseech unceasingly, O Bride who knewest not man, O blessed and pure Theotokos.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Thou wast shown to be a shower-laden cloud of the Spirit for those on earth, O all-blessed one, watering the hearts of the faithful as though they were furrows; and, going about the ends of the earth in thy divine discourses, thou didst pour forth a rain of doctrines, O all-wise one. Wherefore, with divine wisdom thou didst let fall the sweet savor of the Spirit in torrents for the hearts of all. O God-bearing Isaacius, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer who knewest not wedlock, as the receptacle of the Comforter, O all-hymned one, haste thou to deliver me, who am the vile habitation of iniquity and am become in mind the plaything of the demons, from their malice, and make of me a splendid abode of the virtues. O radiant and incorrupt one, drive from me the cloud of the passions and vouchsafe unto me a share in the kingdom on high and the never-waning light, through thy supplications.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, cried out, weeping, and, bitterly lamenting, exclaimed: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn, beholding The crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O Long-suffering Lord, abyss and unfathomable wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings.”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thy power, and my heart was filled with gladness in the Lord.

As thou didst show forth thy life on earth as angelic, thou joinest chorus with the heavenly hosts.

Having first been a leader of monks from the desert, O divinely wise and glorious one, thou didst provide a model for those in the city.

Thy memory now doth truly gladden the hearts of those who hymn thee, O father Isaacius.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, now as ever free thy servants from the iniquitous foe by thy supplications.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Thou didst truly shine forth from the desert like a radiant star, and with thy doctrines didst drive away the night of heresy.

Holding the horse of Valens by the bridle, O all-praised one, thou didst denounce his bestial understanding, openly putting him to shame.

Thou didst expose thy head to the blows of a staff, O father, noetically holding Christ God to be the Head of thy faith.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Virgin who hast been shown to be higher in honor than the cherubim, entreat thy Son, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Through the knowledge of the Spirit thou didst foretell an abominable death for Valens, O wise one, and wast truly shown to be a glorious prophet.

With the winnowing-fan of the Faith thou didst gather the faithful in like wheat, O wise one, and by thy supplications thou didst burn up Valens like weeds in a bonfire.

Thou hast smoothed the tablets of the hearts of those who heed thee with faith, O divinely wise Isaacius, engraving the image of Orthodoxy upon them.

*Theotokion:* O thou who alone gavest birth to the Word in the flesh at the archangel’s word, deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy, we pray.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits…”—

Burning with zeal in the Church of Christ as a faithful favorite of God, thou didst hold the reins of Valens, O venerable one, and didst speak to him in prophecy concerning the captivity of the Church and his abominable death. Wherefore, ever pray for us who honor thee, O venerable Isaacius.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Lord God of our fathers, Who in the beginning founded the earth and established the heavens by Thy word: blessed art Thou forever!

O Lord God of our fathers, Who granted thy venerable one the words to upbraid the tyrant for his wickedness, blessed art Thou forever!

Dwelling gloriously in the splendid mansion of the righteous, O father, thou criest out to the Creator: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers!

O honored father, cease thou never to entreat the Savior constantly in our behalf, that thy flock may be delivered from every misfortune and may receive life which cannot be taken away.

*Theotokion:* O Lord God of our fathers, Who dwelt within the Virgin’s womb and in her restored Adam, blessed art Thou forever!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The unoriginate King of glory, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Him Who showed forth Isaacius as a champion of the Orthodox Faith do ye hymn, O priests; ye people, exalt Him supremely ­forever.

Thou didst come forth from the wilderness as a noetic lamb, driving the wild beasts from the flock of Christ, and expelling them to dwell in empty places.

In thy meekness of spirit thou wast not daunted by the cruel and wicked wrath of Valens, O father, for the Spirit of truth was working within thee.

*Theotokion:* The Stone of life was cut from thee without the aid of man’s hands, as is written, O all-holy and pure one: God Whose good pleasure it was to dwell within thee.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* In hymns do we magnify thee, the Theotokos, the Mother of the Light.

Thou didst mightily crush the powers of the ungodly with the strength of the divine Spirit.

With the bond of faith thou didst bind with bonds the heretical hordes.

O divinely wise Isaacius, cease thou never to cause God to be mindful of our salvation.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thy birthgiving hath transformed the birthgiving of Eden, which was in grief.

