The 1st Day of the MONTH OF MARCH

Commemoration of the Holy Martyred Nun Eudocia

If this feast fall within the Great Fast, we chant Alleluia at Matins; but if it fall outside the Fast, we chant “God is the Lord…” and the troparion of the saint.

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Having first fasted and caused the uprisings of the flesh to wither away through abstinence, thou didst later set at nought the wiles of the enemy through martyrdom and didst triumph over him, O divinely blessed Eudocia. Wherefore, Jesus, Who loveth mankind, the Savior of our souls, hath crowned thee for thy twofold struggles.

Like rich soil thou didst receive the divine seed in the furrows of thy heart, O divinely blessed one, and thou didst truly put forth the grain of martyrdom, producing it a hundredfold. Thou didst lay it up in noetic granaries through the power of the Spirit Who transformed thee and wrought in thee a greater change through grace, O most lauded Eudocia.

By thy vivifying utterance thou didst raise up the dead, O glorious Eudocia, having first mortified the passions of thy body with the pangs of asceticism. And now thou livest with the martyrs in the heavens, having completed the course of martyrdom with the help of the Spirit, and thou prayest for all who hymn thee with faith.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

Rejoice, O beam of solar radiance, throne of the never-setting Sun, who shone forth the ineffable Sun! Rejoice, O mind shining with divine splendor, flash of lightning illumining the ends of the earth, true luster of gold, O most comely and all-immaculate one who hath caused the unwaning Light to shine upon the faithful!

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

Beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified and pierced by a spear in His side, the all-pure one cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the thankless people rewarded Thee for the good things Thou hast done for them? And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel at Thy voluntary crucifixion, O Compassionate One!”

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

Having bound thy soul to the love of Christ with uprightness of mind, as a disciple of the Word thou didst avoid corrupt, transitory and beautiful things by ignoring them; and having first mortified the passions by fasting, thou didst put the enemy to shame by thy suffering. Wherefore, Christ hath vouchsafed unto thee a twofold crown. O glorious Eudocia, venerable passion-bearer, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyred nun, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Be Thou well pleased to transform the misery of my soul into delight, O Good One, through the entreaties of Thy passion-bearer Eudocia; and grant that I may hymn her, O Word.

Who can openly confess the depth of Thy compassion, O Christ? For it hath made into a refuge of salvation one who of old was an abyss of transgressions.

Like good soil did thine all-glorious soul receive the rain of the teaching of the venerable Germanus, and as fruit it brought forth the grain of piety.

Having received the noetic burning coal of Christ within thy heart through baptism, O most pure one, thou didst truly reduce deception and the passions of the flesh to ashes.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast truly been shown to be a godly habitation more spacious and honorable than the heavens, O Virgin Theotokos; and the choir of the angels now rejoiceth in thee.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Having acquired confirmation and an unassailable rampart in her bosom, Thy venerable one, O Christ, was not shaken by the assaults of the enemy, but destroyed him utterly.

Desiring the beauty of Christ, and devoured by His love, thou didst unite thyself to Him through martyrdom, O divinely wise and most glorious Eudocia.

Having purified thyself with Christian baptism, by thy tears and, ultimately, by the blood thou didst shed in martyrdom, thou becamest a temple for the Trinity and a place of sanctity.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst blossom forth from Anna as a joy to thy race, O Virgin, and gavest birth unto the King; and, released by thee from the curse, women rejoice in thy birthgiving.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the ­Wisdom…”—

Illumined by radiance divine, thou didst leave behind the darkness of deception and in the flesh didst receive immaterial life; and filled with the divine grace of the Spirit, thou didst raise up the dead by thy mere utterance. Wherefore, in thine end thou wast divinely adorned with the crown of martyrdom, and didst put the deceiver to shame, O Eudocia, equal of the angels. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All of us, the generations of men, call thee, the Virgin, blessed, who alone among women gavest birth unto God in the flesh without seed; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and with milk thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith bow down before thine all-holy birthgiving!

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, The Ewe-lamb exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb is in pain, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy! O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy: have pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

With the river of thy divine blood, O glorious Eudocia, thou didst cause the abyss of ungodliness to dry up.

She who before entrapped the senseless in snares of fornication now draweth the faithful into the kingdom of God.

Having rightly distributed the corruptible wealth which thou didst unjustly amass, thou didst inherit the riches of incorruption.

*Theotokion:* Incarnate of the pure Virgin, O Lord, Thou hast shone forth light in the night and darkness of transgression.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Shining forth, the never-waning Light truly drew the glorious one out of the darkness of the passions and, leading her to the path of dispassion, hath shown her to be most radiant.

Having betrothed thyself to the Son of God the King, O all-glorious one, by thine honored invocation thou didst raise up the son of the king, who had died a grievous death.

At the tribunal, O glorious one, thou didst with manly mind profess Christ to be God incarnate; and, beheaded by the sword, thou joinest chorus with the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Possessed of thine intercession as our hope, and surrounded by the misfortunes of bitter pangs, we the faithful earnestly have recourse unto thee, O Virgin Mistress.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

In that the zeal of thy faith was fervent, whereby thou didst trample upon the position of the unbelievers, O martyr Eudocia, thou didst win the victory of martyrdom.

Having added the torrents of thy tears to the drops of thy blood shed in martyrdom, by both thou didst make a single cup of salvation.

She who before was full of stench because of the magnitude of her impurity, is now filled with sweet fragrance and rejoiceth with the choirs of the virgins.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O pure Theotokos, joy of the world! Vouchsafe thy joy unto those who cry out to thee in faith with the angel, and banish our grief.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

Having contended well in thy suffering, O most lauded one, even after thy death thou dost sanctify with outpourings of wonders us who with faith have recourse to thy divine church; and, holding festival, we entreat thee, O venerable martyr Eudocia: May we be delivered from spiritual afflictions and draw forth the grace of miracles.

*Ikos:* The church of the passion-bearer hath been shown to be paradise, having acquired in its midst a tree of immortality, her precious body; and those who take the fruit thereof are mightily sanctified by its branches. And beholding, they are amazed at how a dead body truly poureth forth healings, bringing all to their senses. Wherefore, with haste come ye all now with me, the lowly one, and, washing away our filth, let us draw forth the grace of miracles.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Trampled by thy feet, the enemy and deceiver, who of old had ensnared thee, striving to apprehend thee with down-pourings of evil, cried aloud, saying: “Woe is me! I am vanquished by thine inviolable fellowship with God, O pure and all-praised Eudocia!”

Having mortified thy carnal-mindedness by great abstinence, thou bestowest resurrection upon the dead with thy boldness before God and thine unwavering entreaty, O Eudocia; for He fulfilleth the will of those who fear Him.

Thou didst bear the sufferings of Christ upon the shoulders of thy soul like an adornment fittingly divine, and didst attract Him by thy desire for incorruption; wherefore He betrothed thee as His bride, who criest out blamelessly: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Manifestly proclaiming thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, Gideon bore a bowl full of the water he had wrung from the fleece; for the whole Godhead made its abode within thee, O all-pure one: the blessed Fruit of thy womb.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Approaching thy true Lover in mind without hesitation, thou didst endure the wounding of thy flesh and the bitter pain of the fire, O most glorious martyr, blessing Christ for all ages.

Having won through the three-fold billows of tribulations with the mast of the Cross and the rudder of the spirit, thou didst reach the safe harbor of the kingdom of God, O glorious one, blessing Christ forever.

Thou didst cast off the ugliness of the passions and didst array thy soul in the beautiful robe of dispassion; wherefore, betrothing thee to Himself as a bride, Christ caused thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven.

*Theotokion:* By thee, O Theotokos, is our first mother freed from the curse; and, lo! women now suffer for Christ, and female nature rejoiceth, as the protomartyr Thecla the virgin crieth.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

The sight of thy countenance, which shone like the sun in spiritual radiance, O pure one, was shown to be a vision strange to the unbelievers who watched; for, as thou didst love Christ, thou wast glorified by Him as is meet, O most honored one.

Having lighted the lamp of thy soul, O martyr, rejoicing thou hast now entered in splendor into the bridal chamber of Christ with the wise virgins, bearing thy blood as oil. With them be thou mindful of all who praise thee with faith.

Like a sweet-smelling rose, O divinely wise Eudocia, thou didst blossom forth beautifully out of the thorns of deception, hast perfumed the souls of the faithful, and hast surely dispelled the foul stench of the deception of the unbelievers; wherefore, we call thee blessed.

O pure martyr, by thy supplications to God our Deliverer save those who lovingly celebrate thy memorial service, and take away the spiritual defilement of me who have so poorly hymned thee.

*Theotokion:* Never cease to entreat in our behalf thy Son and God, Who loveth mankind, O Virgin; for we have acquired thee as our hope, and by thine intercession are we who glorify thee with faith delivered from tribulations and passions, from transgressions and pains.

