The 2nd Day of the MONTH OF MARCH

Commemoration of the Manifestation of the “Reigning” Icon of the All-holy Theotokos

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone VI—

Having acquired in her an impregnable rampart, not as lovers of the world but as faithful people, let us fall down before the Virgin Mistress, O brethren, and hymn her intercession.

As thy servants, O all-pure one, we cry out to thee: spurn us not who pray to thee, but shelter us with thy protection.

Haste thou, O gracious Queen, and hearken to my prayer, that my hymn of laudation may come before thee.

Who can recount thy powers, O all-pure one? Thee do we have as our Mistress, and we shall in nowise fear the children of disobedience.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone V—

O Theotokos, thou art truly more holy than the cherubim and more exalted than the seraphim. Thee do we know as our helper. Never cease to pray for us, O might and refuge of our souls.

Prokimenon of the day.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII—

We glorify the wondrous appearance of thine icon, O all-immaculate Theotokos, and we celebrate thine aid to us. For, as Mother of Life, thou dost entreat Christ God in behalf of us who have set our only hope on thee, O sure guide to our salvation.

*Stichos:* I shall commemorate thy name in every generation and generation.

Let us set grief aside, O brethren; for, behold! a second unburnt bush, the icon of the Mother of God, which is seen by the Orthodox people, is revealed for the salvation of sinners.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem! And rejoice, O ye poor, for invincible is Sion, and the Mother of our God is in the midst of her people!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VI—

The splendid festival of our helper hath dawned today. Let creation leap for joy, and let the assemblies of men join chorus; for the holy Theotokos summoneth us to behold her icon, which illumineth all the Orthodox with beams of mercy. Wherefore, rejoicing, let us cry out: O all-immaculate one, save us, the faithful children of thy land!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Seeking the city of Sion, we flee today beneath thy protection, O pure Virgin, and none can assail us, for there is no city as powerful as the one of Him Who is God, and no other might to equal that of the mercy of the Virgin Mistress.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone IV—

I have lamented and cried unto thee, O Mistress, but my crying hath availed me nought, and my wailing hath been drowned out by the torrent of my sins. How then can I offer thee supplication? Do thou thyself grant my prayer and preserve thy servant. My heart hath withered, and my head is covered with sores; my eyes are grown weak from darkness, and I am wounded in my joints. But save me, in that thou art she who reigneth, and grant me great mercy. *Twice*

Injustice hath covered thy land like a sea, and we are now cruelly engulfed; but do thou stretch forth thy right hand and, as thou art all-lauded, set us upon the rock of the Faith. Save us, save us, O Mistress, and establish thy dominion among us. *Twice*

Thy flock here is shown to have the character of the serpent, for we are buffetted by the wind and are unable to endure; but, as thou art good, still thou the waters of contention and reject not thy servants, ever maintaining thy mercy even unto us. If thou, O Theotokos who art exalted far above all others, if thou, O impregnable rampart and joy of the world, wilt not, who then will beseech thy Son, Christ our God, in our behalf, that He have mercy upon His grieving people, who are contrite of heart? Before Him, then, be thou a never-tiring mediatress, and save us. *Twice*

Come, all ye faithful, and, assembling together, let us cry out to the reigning Mistress and say to her thus: We are all unprofitable, and we therefore fall down before thee and entreat thee with boldness and faith, saying: Disdain us not who are accursed; but haste thou to make entreaty, and save all the Orthodox! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Put not your trust in princes who pass away; for they are able to accomplish nought, and are sons of men; they will fade like the grass, and no one will remember them. But pray, pray, O brethren, and the Mother of our God will take you under her protection; and we shall find rest, O ye people, beneath her mantle.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Genesis

Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And came to a certain place and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and dreamed; and behold! a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and said, “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac: fear not. The land on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the north, and to the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed. And behold, I am with thee to preserve thee in all the way wherein thou shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee until I have done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said, “The Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and said, “How fearful is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.”

A Reading from the Prophecy of Ezekiel

Thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord said to me, “This gate shall be shut. It shall not be opened, and no one shall pass through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in by the way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord; and I fell upon my face.

A Reading from Proverbs

Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying, “Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding she saith, “Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.” Leave folly, that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge. He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee; rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser; instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of saints is understanding: for to know the law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.

At Litia, this sticheron, in Tone I—

Fearsome is the wrath of the Lord which lieth upon all mortals, yet because of it aid is shown today unto the faithful; for, lo! she who is full of grace doth come, unto the salvation of her people, and no one is able to destroy her flock, for she is the Mistress of the world.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

As ye await the justice of the Most High, do not lament over it because ye are sorely tested, but cry aloud thus: We know that we are accursed, yet be not angry with us utterly, and by the supplications of the Theotokos save all the Orthodox.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI—

Thou wast a humble maiden, and unto us thou art today shown to be the Queen and Mother of all. Marvelling at this, we cry out to thee: How awesome is this mystery, and how fitting it is that we praise thee, the all-good one; but, as the one who hath brought the heavens down to the earth and exalted the earth to the heavens, O Theotokos, save thy people, and do thou thyself preserve thy flock.

*Stichos:* Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.

Be thou full of mercy, O gracious one, and hearken unto us who beseech thee and speak thus to thee: Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to Christ, for all generations call thee blessed and all things praise thee, in that thy dominion is truly indestructible.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Holy art Thou, O Lord, and Thy Mother, who was as humble as a lamb. Because of her, more than all the incorporeal ones, is Thy glory adorned with beauty today, and it shall not be moved, and will preserve us, for it is omnipotent.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

How shall we hymn thee, the Virgin Mistress, and what shall we call thee, the Mother of the ineffable and unapproachable Light? But thou art truly the Theotokos, and thy name is praised and glorified now and forever, unto the end of time.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Seeking the city of Sion, we flee today beneath thy protection, O pure Virgin, and none can assail us, for there is no city as powerful as the one of Him Who is God, and no other might to equal that of the mercy of the Virgin Mistress. *Thrice*

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the Theotokos, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the troparion again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II—

The sound of weeping is heard in Sion, and great lamentation is raised in its holy streets. O Virgin Mistress, hearken unto them, for they are poured forth by thy people; and save the desolate city.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

We are in reproach of mouth and constraint of tongue, for we have all embittered the King, thy Son, and He hath visited His menace upon us; yet do thou, O all-pure Virgin, beseech Him Who was born of thee, and, if He hath not become utterly wroth with us, let Him cause the desolate city to flourish.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VII—

Arise, arise, O Mistress, and Sion shall be arrayed in its might, and the bitter water shall be unto us like honey! We are replete with the straits which the Creator hath brought upon us, O ye people, and, chanting, we entreat thy dominion, for it will have no end.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Dreadful is the stumbling-block set in our path by the serpent, for he is a liar and murderer from of old; therefore, O Queen and Virgin, we entreat thee and cease not to pray, for we know of thee that his head shall be bruised by thy Seed, and thy dominion will have no end.

Polyeleos, and this Magnification—

We magnify thee, O all-holy Virgin, divinely chosen Maiden, and we honor the Reigning image of thy holiness, whereby thou bestowest great mercy upon all who have recourse to it with faith.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness. \[Ps. 131: 1\]

B How he made an oath unto the Lord, and vowed unto the God of Jacob. \[Ps. 131: 2\]

A Lo, we have heard of it in Ephratha, we have found it in the plains of the wood. \[Ps. 131: 6\]

B Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. \[Ps. 86: 3\]

A God is in the midst of her, and she shall not be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 6\]

B The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it. \[Ps. 131: 11\]

A Of the fruit of thy loins will I set upon thy throne. \[Ps. 131: 11\]

B For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself. \[Ps. 131: 13\]

A The Most High hath hallowed His tabernacle. \[Ps. 45: 5\]

B Holiness and majesty are in His sanctuary. \[Ps. 93: 6\]

A Holy is Thy temple, wonderful in righteousness. \[Ps. 64: 5,6\]

B Holiness becometh Thine house, O Lord, unto length of days. \[Ps. 92: 6\]

A I shall commemorate thy name in every generation and generation. \[Ps. 44: 18\]

B Blessed is the Lord forever, and unto the ages of ages. \[cf. Ps. 88: 53\]

Glory..., Now & ever..., Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Though thou lettest fall a single drop of thy mercy upon me, O all-pure one, my tongue would be unable to magnify thee as is meet; yet ineffable and beyond measure is thy goodness, and I hymn thy glory, for thou art truly the Mother of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the foregoing is repeated.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

I shall commemorate thy name in every generation and generation.

*Stichos:* My heart hath poured forth a good word; I speak of my works to the King.

Let every breath praise the Lord

Gospel according to Luke, § 4 \[Lk. 1: 39-49, 56\]

In those days, Mary arose and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, that, when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud voice, and said: “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.” And Mary said: “My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is His name.” And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

We have no other help, we have no other hope than thee, O Mistress. Do thou help us. On thee do we set our hope, and in thee do we boast, for we are thy servants. Let us not be put to shame.

Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “Save the Orthodox land, O Theotokos, and preserve thy people”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Destruction of our own devising hath covered all thy land, and great darkness reigneth here in thy garden. Grievous is this for me, and I raise lamentation unto thee, O all-pure Mother; but if thou wilt hear me, I shall fear nought, and I will hymn thy name, for gloriously hast thou been glorified.

Teach me repentance, O Mistress, that I may pour out my tears day and night, and, humbled by mine enemies, may cry aloud unto thee: No one is pure save thee, O pure Maiden, and thy dominion preserveth me, for gloriously hast thou been ­glorified.

Out of the depths of mine evils I cry to thee, and my groaning is not silent before thee. Behold and see, O Virgin Mistress, and reject me not, but hearken to the cry of my voice and cover me with the robe of thy humble-mindedness, for gloriously hast thou been glorified.

Wrathful judgment hath come down upon us, and the joy of thy people hath been shattered, for we all weep and lament and say thus: O sword of God, how long before thou art withdrawn? Cease, therefore, and have pity upon us, and we shall hymn the dominion of our Mistress, for gloriously hath she been glorified.

Out of the night of evil deeds have deceptions destroyed us. Sion hath fallen, and we are made captive. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, wherefore hast thou become so dark? For this cause let us cry out thus to our Mistress: Only thy dominion preserveth us, for gloriously hast thou been glorified.

Katavasia as prescribed by the Typicon.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

The serpent deluded me, for he is a liar; and, harboring what is spiritually harmful within itself, my heart hath become troubled. I remain as one dead. With what words shall I mourn myself? Yet I beseech thee, O Mistress, I entreat thee and say: Gain the mastery over him and cleanse me of my sin.

With bitter tears I pour out my heart like water; my contrition is as a sacrifice to thee, O all-pure one, and I pray: Nay, turn not away from me, thy servant, but preserve me until the last day.

My eyes are grown dim because of my wounds, and my burden hath borne me down. Where is my glory? Mine enemy and foe hath imprisoned me, yet I accept my bonds as mercy and chant in gladness: There is none like our God, Who will raise up His Anointed and His Mother, our Mistress!

Give me guidance, O thou who dost nourish the poor, and illumine me with the light which shineth forth from thee in abundance. O Theotokos, Mother of my God, be thou a faithful help for me.

Beset am I by soul-destroying thoughts, and it is difficult for me. Wilt thou disdain thy servant? O all-pure one, I pray thee: Raise me up from the dung-hill of my sins, heal my sores, and save me, save me, O Mistress!

Sessional hymn, in Tone III—

O ineffable and most excellent ladder: as did the ladder which our forefather beheld descending from the heavens, so hast thou, O Bride of God, joined heaven to earth. Thou art the ascent whereby we are saved from tribulations.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Beholding Christ, thy Son and God, hanging on the Cross between two thieves, O Mother, thou didst bitterly lament; and a sword pierced thy heart. O Virgin Mistress, knowing pain thyself, save all thy broken people who are being sorely tried.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Desolation is come upon thy servant, and our house is become empty and deserted. I go and cry out, but there is none to save me: death alone respondeth to my voice. And, lamenting, I entreat thee and say: Reject me not, O pure virgin, that I may be saved.

Extend thy flower-bearing hand, O Mistress, and bring life to thy garden, that the poor may find their bread and the paupers raiment for themselves, and all may praise thy name, for thy mercy is truly ineffable.

If thou desire it, no one will destroy us, for thou hast acquired great boldness with Christ God, thy Son; and, perceiving this, we cry out to thee, O Mistress, that thou keep us also under thy ­protection.

We, the Orthodox Christians, flee today beneath thy mercy; and, splendidly celebrating the manifestation of thy precious icon, we say to thee: Thou dost spread thine invincible mantle over us also, O gracious one.

Understand, ye rebellious nations, and boast not in your designs, for there is one city which is impregnable, and that is thy dominion and kingdom, O Ever-virgin Mistress, which will stand until the end of time.

Even when I am in bondage, O pure Maiden, yet through thee am I ever free, and my degradation is not a cause of fear to me, but is as the crucible and the fire are to gold. For, understanding this, I glorify my bonds and magnify thee, the immaculate Virgin.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The serpent hath caused us to dwell in the vale of weeping and wicked hopes, and therefore we cannot bear our sorrows. But do thou, O Theotokos, spread thy protection over us, that we may be saved from evils.

O Virgin Maiden, thou hast saved us from bondage to the enemy, and thy name hath therefore been inscribed in beauty. Thou art the Queen of the world, and thy dominion will last until the final day.

Thou art the Mother of Light unapproachable, and the darkness of the adversary striveth in vain today; yet no one can assail us, for our Mistress is with us, and her glory hath no end.

O people of God, my friends, believe on Christ our God and her who all-wondrously gave birth to Him; and, keeping the commandments of God Most High, ye shall find peace and great mercy for your souls.

Even the angels have glorified thee, the Mistress of all, who hast been exalted higher than heaven; for they chant to Christ, thy Son: Thou hast redeemed Thy people, and there is good-will among men.

Who can recount thy greatness, O Theotokos? For thou gavest birth in manner past understanding to God the Word, and the tongue of man is unable to hymn thee worthily. But mercifully accept my prayer and preserve thy servant.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Night and darkness and the waters of gainsaying cruelly try thy land. Lo! this is the menace of God and His wrath. Yet I pray, I pray, O all-pure one, and say: What thou dost wish, thou canst do. And I know that the Maiden maketh entreaty for her dominion.

We, thy people, have been wounded by the serpent, and we cry out to thee as from the belly of hades, O gracious Virgin: O Theotokos, not for our sake, but for the sake of those chosen by thee who have loved the angelic life, save thou all the ­Orthodox people.

As prisoners in fetters, O Queen, what can we do without thee, and where can we find release from our sins? Yet as thou art good, establish thy holiness within us and reject not those who pray to thee.

My sun hath gone dark and my spirit hath departed into the barren earth; therefore I have remembered the light of the Sun of righteousness and have humbled my pride. Unto thee do I cry, O pure Virgin, that thou save thy servant.

Let us remain in oneness of mind, O ye people, and let us rejoice in the wounds which are from the Creator, for, chastising, the Lord hath chastened us, but He hath not given us over to death and hath taught us to understand His will.

The dead shall arise and the earth shall cast up its bones, for He Who deigned to abase Himself shall resurrect us all: He is the King of the world, and His Mother is our Mistress.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII—

To thee, the champion leader, do we offer hymns of victory, for thy might hath been given to us, and we are not afraid; for our salvation is not of this world, but we are defended by the loving-kindness of the all-exalted Mistress. Today we rejoice therein, for the Mistress hath come to watch over her land.

*Ikos:* Beholding thine icon—the Ancient of Days in the clouds, and Christ God, thy Son and the Savior of the world, in thine arms—we bow down before thy temple and, kissing thy precious feet, we cry out to thee thus: Truly great salvation hath been given us, and our hope is ever before us, for the Mistress hath come to watch over her land.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Join chorus, ye assemblies of the faithful, and chant unto the King Who is enthroned in the highest, for blessed and wonderful is our God, the great Lover, and awesome is the heavenly Sion and glorified forever.

Thy land hath been shown to be a vale of weeping: burning fire hath come and embraced it; yet do not mourn, O brethren, for, like the bush which burned but was not consumed, the temple of Sion is glorious forever.

Thee do we have, the bestower of dew, and we in nowise fear the winds which arise in the desert; for we beseech thee, the all-pure one, and cry out to thee thus: Revive thy garden, and it shall be glorious forever!

Mine enemies have set a deceitful word upon me, and the horn of the disobedient doth crush me. Even my friends have abandoned me; but do thou not forsake me, O Mistress, and save me, for thou art the Mother of my God, and thy temple is glorious forever.

Betroth me to thy holiness, O Ever-virgin, and I shall not be afraid of the darkness of mine enemies who have grievously assailed me; and I shall cry out to thee thus: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou art the holy city and glorious forever!

The cherubim, seraphim and all the armies of heaven hymn thee, the all-blessed one, and, crying out, they say: There is no temple save thee, and it is all-glorious forever!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Accept my lamentation, O my Mistress, and quench the fire which hath been kindled by the adversaries, that I may recognize my God and cry out to Him with zeal: Hymn and exalt Him supremely forever!

I am hungry and cry out to thee, O Mistress, and I entreat thee: Let not corruption be my lot, but thy mercy! Wherefore, I say thereof: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him ­supremely forever!

Drive from me overweening pride, O gracious one, and quench the fire of my wounds. Not like smoke, but like sweet savor before the Lord, will I chant to my brethren: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt the Lord supremely forever!

Out of the furnace of my burning as from the flame of hell I cry to thee: O Virgin Mistress, sprinkle upon me the dew of thy tears which were shed at the Cross of thy Son, and I shall cry out, exclaiming: Bless the Mother of God Most High! Hymn and exalt the Lord supremely forever!

With the light of thy humble-mindedness illumine mine eye which loveth darkness, and I shall recognize the will of Him Who fashioned me; and not from my own wisdom, but from my heart I shall exclaim to Him: Chant unto Him and exalt Him supremely forever!

Where sin is, there is the gnashing of teeth; but be not silent, O pure Virgin, and grant me speech of understanding, that I may bear my burden and cry out in God my Savior: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

The winds of tempest will not crush even one of the towers of thy bulwark, for thy temple is established and will never be shaken. And, rejoicing therein, we chant to thee: Glory to thy might!

All mysteries are shown to be laid bare today. Holy is Thy judgment, O Lord, and holy is Thy name. But see Thou, O God, that Thy Mother standeth in the midst of my brethren, and allay thy wrath.

Gird thou upon me the armor of faith, O gracious one, and strengthen my right hand with humility of mind, that I may remain vigilant, hymning thy name, that, if thou enable me, I may strive even unto death.

Thy fiery staff is like a pure flame, O our directress, and therewith thou dost lead thy people, that Christians may be preserved from misfortunes.

The raging of hades availeth nought against thee, for holy is thy temple, and David received a promise concerning his seed. Thy praise is never-ceasing and thy might endureth to the end of time.

Exapostilarion—

All generations call thee blessed, O Theotokos, for thy humility hath been more greatly adorned than all, and thy name hath been crowned, and God hath glorified thee as His Mother.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone V—

In thy maternal embrace thou didst bear Him Who sitteth upon the cherubim, and He hath created thy dominion. Rejoicing therein, we chant to thee: Hosanna, O Mother of Christ! *Twice*

Thy perpetual virginity is like an unshakable tower whose pinnacle is higher than the heavens. The Mighty One hath done great things for thee. Today thou art the Mistress of the world, and we chant unto thee: Hosanna, O Mother of Christ!

O Virgin Theotokos, we the faithful bless and glorify thee as is meet: the impregnable city, the invincible rampart, the steadfast intercessor and refuge of our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Truly thou art the Theotokos and thy glory is ineffable. Wherefore, we magnify thee, crying out with the cherubim and seraphim: Hosanna, O Mother of Christ!

Great Doxology, troparion, litanies and dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos—

My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.

*Stichos:* For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Epistle to the Philippians, § 240 \[Phil. 2: 5-11\]

Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Himself the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII—

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Gospel according to Luke, § 54

\[Lk. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28\]

At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said: “Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.” And Jesus answered and said unto her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.” And it came to pass, as He spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him: “Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked.” But He said: “Yea, rather, blessed are those who hear the word of God, and keep it.”

Communion Verse—

I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

