THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE FORTY MARTYRS

WHO SUFFERED IN THE LAKE OF SEBASTE

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera for the day from the Triodion, and 4 stichera for the martyrs, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone II—

Valiantly enduring real torments, rejoicing in that for which they longed, the holy martyrs said one to another: “If we do not shed our garments, we cannot put off the old man. Winter is cruel, but paradise is sweet; the ice is painful, but the acquisition of the Kingdom is delightful. Then, let us not give way, O warriors! Let us endure but a little while, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory by Christ God, the Savior of our souls.” *Once*

Casting off all their garments and entering the lake with trembling, the holy martyrs said one to another: “Let us not spare today our corruptible garments, that we may attain the paradise which we lost! Having once been clothed because of the pernicious serpent, let us now unclothe ourselves for the resurrection of all. Let us disdain the frigid ice and despise the flesh, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory by Christ God, the Savior of our souls!” *Twice*

Seeing tortures as delight, running to the frozen lake as to a warm spring, the holy martyrs said: “Let us not fear the season of winter, that we may avoid the fearsome fire of Gehenna; let our legs be consumed by fire, that they may dance eternally; let our arms be cut off, that they may stretch themselves forth unto the Lord; let us not spare our mortal nature; let us submit to death, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory by Christ God, the Savior of our souls.” *Once*

Glory..., in the same tone: Repeat the first sticheron: “Valiantly enduring...”—

Now and ever...: Dogmaticon theotokion, in the same tone—

The shadow of the law passed away when grace arrived; for, as the bush wrapped in flame did not burn, so the Virgin gave birth and yet remained a virgin. In place of the pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth. Instead of Moses, Christ is come, the Salvation of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. The Readings for the day \(i.e., from the Triodion\), and three Readings for the martyrs—

Reading from the Prophet Isaiah \(43:9-14\)

Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and show us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour. I have declared, and have saved, and I have showed, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the Lord, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(3:1-9\)

But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in the furnace hath he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath care for his elect.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

\(5:15-24; 6:1-3\)

But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.

And the rest of the order for the Presanctified Liturgy.

But if the Presanctified Liturgy be not served, at the Aposticha we chant the stichera from the Triodion, and Glory..., in Tone VI—

In hymnody let us praise the forty passion-bearing martyrs, O ye faithful, and with sweet singing let us cry out to them, saying: Rejoice, ye athletes of Christ: Hesychius, Meliton, Heraclius, Smaragdus and Domnus, Eunoïcus, Valens and Vivianus, Claudius and Priscus! Rejoice, Theodulus, Eutychius and John, Xantheas, Helianus, Sisinius, Cyrion, Angius, Ætius and Flavius! Rejoice, Acacius, Ecditius, Lysimachus, Alexander, Elias and Candidus, Theophilus, Dometian and godly Gaius and Gorgonius! Rejoice, Leontius and Athanasius, Cyril and Sacerdon, Nicholas and Valerius, Philoctimon, Severian, Chudion and Aglaius, for ye have boldness before Christ our God, O most honored martyrs! Him do ye earnestly beseech, that those who keep your most precious memory with faith may be saved.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Thee do we beseech: Pray thou, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.

After “Now lettest thy servant depart in peace...,” the Troparion, in Tone I—

By the pangs of Thy saints, be Thou entreated, O Lord, and heal all our diseases, we beseech Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

When Gabriel announced to thee, Rejoice! O Virgin, the Master of all became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, at His cry, as the righteous David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, having borne thy Creator. Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who came forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving!

Litany. Three full prostrations. Dismissal.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the martyrs, twice; Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion.

After the first and second chantings of the Psalter, the Sessional hymns from the Triodion. No litanies are intoned.

After the third chanting of the Psalter, the priest intoneth the little litany, after which we chant this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...”—

O ye forty godly martyrs of Christ, like the greatest of stars ye ever illumine the honorable firmament of the Church and enlighten the faithful.

Glory..., in the same tone: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

O wondrous athletes, passing over torment with most manly resolve, ye passed through fire and water, and crossed over to the broad expanses of salvation, receiving as an inheritance the kingdom of heaven, wherein ye make divine supplication in our behalf, O wise forty.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O Theotokos and Mistress, we, thy servants, thankfully chanting with all our hearts and earnestly entreating thy mercies, cry out, saying: O all-holy Virgin, go thou before us and deliver us from our enemies, visible and invisible, and from every threat, for thou art our aid.

But if it be any Saturday other than that of the first week of the Fast, after the first chanting of the Psalter, we chant the Sessional hymn: “O ye forty divine martyrs of Christ...,” twice; Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O all-pure Virgin, accept this entreaty from us who have recourse to thy protection, and never cease to entreat Him Who loveth mankind, that He save thy servants.

And after the second chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn: “O wondrous athletes...,” twice; Glory..., Now and ever...: the Theotokion: “O Theotokos and Mistress...”

If it be Saturday or Sunday, the Polyeleos and Magnification are chanted —

We magnify you, O ye holy and victorious forty martyrs, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye did endure for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and those who hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be ­multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning...”—

Adornment of the holy martyrs! Lo! the divinely assembled company of the forty warriors of four-fold radiance! Tried by fire and freezing cold, the wise ones were truly shown to be soldiers of Christ, the King of all; and they entreat Him that we be saved. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

I weep now before the Judgment, O pure one, mindful of my wicked and evil deeds, of the abyss of my transgressions which hath grown in size from my youth, stifling my mind. But by their intercession grant me remission, and vouchsafe that I obtain salvation.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment.

*Stichos:* Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire.

Gospel according to St. Luke §106 \(21:12-19\).

The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone II—

Prophetically David cried aloud in the Psalms: We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment! And, fulfilling the word in very deed, O martyrs of Christ, ye passed through fire and water, and entered into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, pray, O ye forty athletes, that we be granted great mercy.

Two canons to the martyrs, with 8 troparia—

Ode I

Canon I, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely-crowned regiment of martyrs,” the composition of John the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

With hymns inspired by God I praise the divinely-crowned regiment of the martyrs of Christ, radiantly celebrating the annual commemoration of the forty, for He hath been glorified!

Rejecting every title on earth, the forty desired the title of Christian, for which they now dwell in the Highest.

Living in Christ and despising the flesh and the world, ye therefore put off the old man and this transitory vesture, and clothed yourselves in the garment of incorruption.

*Theotokion:* Who is able fittingly to describe thy conceiving which surpasseth recounting? For thou, all-pure one, gave birth in the flesh to God, the Savior of us all, Who hath revealed Himself unto us.

Canon II, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely-crowned regiment of martyrs,” the composition of Theophanes, in the same tone—

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

By your supplication, O ye forty martyrs, render God well-disposed now towards us who call upon you with the pure love of our hearts.

Made luminous in the heavens with the rays of the splendor of the three-fold Sun, O ye forty martyrs, protect us who hymn you on earth, which is frozen over by the winter of temptations.

O forty martyrs, invincible and unshaken rampart of piety and the Church and Christian calling: Bring peace to that which is now grievously troubled.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, Mother who knewest not man, thou gavest birth unto the Creator and Lord Who is supernaturally over all and Who, for the sake of us men, assumed our flesh.

*Katavasia: “I shall open my mouth...”*

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Disdaining the army and life, the comeliness of their bodies, and wealth, the right glorious forty martyrs inherited Christ instead of all of these things.

When the forty martyrs were mercilessly stoned with rocks at the command of the tormentors, by the Spirit of God the stones were hurled back against those who commanded that they be beaten.

The serpent of him who invented blasphemy spake through the lips of the tormentors, but his blasphemous mouth is broken by the rocks hurled at the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Without seed didst thou conceive God in thy womb, giving birth unto Him Who was ineffably incarnate; and even the hosts of heaven dare not gaze upon Him, O pure Ever-virgin.

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

O ye martyred company and united chorus of crowned martyrs, standing before the Master, do ye ever save us that sing your praises.

Battered by the lake of the passions and by the waves of grievous temptations, we flee to you, Christ’s forty warriors.

Warmed in the bosom of Abraham and arrayed with glorious apparel, pray ye that Christ grant remission unto those who are bound by the winter of evil circumstances.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Bride of God, be thou the confirmation, refuge and protection of those who have recourse unto thee in faith and confess thee to be the Mother of God.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the ­Wisdom...”—

Having served Christ in martyrdom as warriors and cast down the enemy through suffering, in your deeds ye fulfilled the words of the Prophet: Ye went manfully through fire and water, finding refreshment, life incorruptible. Wherefore, adorned with heavenly crowns, ye rejoice with the choirs of the bodiless ones, O blessed and all-praised passion-bearers. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor your holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory... Now and ever...: Theotokion—

Having fallen into subtle snares set for me by enemies, visible and invisible, and been caught in the tempest of my countless offenses, I flee to the harbor of thy goodness, as to my fervent aid and protection, O pure one. Wherefore, O all-pure one, do thou earnestly entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who pray unceasingly. O all-pure Theotokos, do thou ever beseech Him to grant remission of transgressions unto those who hymn thy glory as is meet.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

“O ye all-ungodly ones, ye are made vainly to offer such a bad bargain!” said the sufferers.

With sharpened swords and wild beasts, fire and the cross did the tormentors threaten the saints of Christ.

“The fire of Gehenna affrighteth us, but we are not afraid of any of our fellow servants here present,” said the athletes.

“Let our arms be cut off, let our feet be burned,” the holy ones cried out, “for we shall receive them back incorruptible.”

*Theotokion:* We beseech thee, O all-pure one who didst conceive God without seed: Ever pray for thy servants.

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

O martyrs, through God ye have become our illumination, for ye have clothed yourselves in splendor undimmed.

O divinely elect and crowned assembly of martyrs, pray that those who hymn you may be delivered from misfortunes.

O holy ones, having been vouchsafed to behold the never-waning light of Christ, ye are accounted worthy to shine forth upon those who sit in darkness.

Shining with the noetic radiance of Christ, O glorious ones, guide us to the divine illumination.

*Theotokion:* Hymning Him Who was incarnate of thy womb, O pure one, we glorify thee as the Mother of God.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Through the most mindless savagery of the tormentors, the athletes, condemned to spend the night in the open air in the cold, chanted a hymn of thanksgiving unto God.

Rejoicing, the forty martyrs endured the painful ice, standing in the lake, yet strengthened with the hope of divine crowns.

Driven out, the serpent which before had made its nest in the waters became an object of scorn for the forty martyrs of Christ, for he was deprived of his deadly strength.

*Theotokion:* To thee who gavest birth unto Christ, the Creator of all, do we cry aloud: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, thou who hast shone forth the Light upon us! Rejoice, thou who didst contain the infinite God!

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

From the raging of the heretics do ye now deliver the honorable Church of Christ, O forty martyrs; for, having been born within Her, ye have passed on to great dignity and glory.

Appearing to us, the forty divinely splendid martyrs of Christ like fiery beacons light the saving path of piety for the faithful.

Passing over from earth to the shelter of heaven, where ye stand before Christ, the Judge of the contest, O martyrs, count me worthy to acquire divine joy.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden Mistress, thou didst truly bear God as thy divine Offspring, as a mystery inscrutable and incomprehensible to all, passing all understanding.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

With joy the author of malice snatched the one who fell away from the forty as he did the wretched Judas from the twelve apostles and man from Eden.

Being shameless, the devil rageth in vain, for as of old by the thief and Matthias, so now by one in the office of guardsman is the tyrant also rent asunder.

Vain-minded and worthy of lamentation is he who lost both lives, for thawed by the fire, he departed into the unquenchable fire.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou gavest birth without knowing man, and remainest forever a virgin, revealing images of thy Son and God, the true Deity.

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

O mighty ones, ye have been shown to be watchful and vigilant preservers of the human race and makers of entreaty; and ye have been put yourselves forward as helpers of the grieving.

Shining forth in your unexcelled beauties within the Church of Christ, O all-praised ones, from temptations deliver those who honor you with love.

Of old ye became destroyers of the deception of the demonized persecutors, O most eminent ones; and be ye now our ready help and rampart.

*Theotokion:* On thee have I set my hope of salvation, O Ever-virgin Mother; and Thee have I appointed as the steadfast and unshaken intercessor of my life.

Kontakion, in Tone VI—

Having left all the army of the world, ye cleaved unto the Master in the heavens, O forty passion-bearers of the Lord; for, having passed through fire and water, O blessed ones, as is meet ye received glory from the heavens and a multitude of crowns.

*Ikos:* Unworthy as I am, I fall down before Christ Almighty, our Creator and God, Who sitteth upon an unapproachable throne, Who stretched out the heavens as it were a curtain, Who established the earth, Who gathered the waters in the bodies thereof, Who created all things out of nought, Who granteth breath and life unto all, Who receiveth hymnody from the archangels, is worshipped by the angels and is glorified by all; and offering up entreaty, I beg the grace of eloquence, that I also may piously hymn the saints whom He Himself showed forth as victors, granting them glory from the heavens and a multitude of crowns.

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The guard set over the forty martyrs was stricken with awe, beholding their crowns; and, rejecting that which bound him to life, taking wing with the love of Thy manifest glory, with the martyrs he sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Hastening to the soul-destroying bath, he that loved his life doth die; but he that loved Christ, being a most exemplary apprehender of those things which he beheld, sang with the martyrs as in a bath of incorruption: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

When the noetic fire flared up in the minds of the forty, the most subtle madness of the ungodly was consumed, as it were melting wax. And to Thee, O Christ, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Exceeding splendid and magnificent is the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, which counter weaveth wreaths for the forty martyrs; for, having passed through fire and water, they cry out in incorruption: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* On Mount Sinai Moses foresaw thee, O pure one, as a burning bush which, without being consumed, bore the unbearable effulgence of the ineffable Being Who, though One of the holy Hypostases thereof, united Himself to the coarseness of our flesh.

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

Your annual commemoration hath brightly dawned, O ye who are most rich, shining far, radiant with the splendor of the Fast. And celebrating it with faith, we chant with you: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

To all are ye shown to be loosers from the passions and beacons shining from afar, the cleansing of the world, the destruction of deception, ­­­clear-voiced proclaimers of the truth and expellers of falsehood, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Ye are revealed to us as noetic beacons shining forth, O martyrs; for ye save the tempest-tossed and guide those who sail and are battered by the storm of life, chanting unto Christ: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Beautiful to God and desirable to the angels is the divinely assembled and most splendid regiment of the forty martyrs inspired by God, the godly and awesome company which crieth out, saying: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* A beacon of light, a luminous cloud and a place of sanctity hast thou been shown to be, O thou who knewest not wedlock, for thou didst ineffably receive the Word, the Holiest of the holy. And chanting unto Him, we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Savagely inciting every creature against the athletes, the enemy hath been put to shame by them all, for the forty martyrs unceasingly hymn and exalt the Lord supremely for all ages.

Cruelly were the members of your bodies broken for Christ, and ye offered yourselves unto God as a divine holocaust. And with the angels ye ever hold chorus, O martyrs, hymning Christ for all ages.

With steadfast resolve the Christ-loving mother took upon her shoulder him to whom she had given birth; and she offered him up as the fruit of piety, a martyr among martyrs, emulating the sacred action of Abraham.

“Run thy race straight to everlasting life, O my son,” the Christ-loving mother cried out to her Christ-loving child, “for I could not bear to see thee appear in second place before Christ, the Judge of the contest!”

*Theotokion:* The Son Who is not parted from the bosom of the Father, yet Who made His abode in thy maternal womb, O pure Virgin Bride of God, do we hymn and exalt supremely for all ages!

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

Ye steadfastly gave yourselves over to a painful death in the midst of winter, O valiant ones; and now, having passed on to the true life which is hidden in Christ, ye beg salvation and remission for us.

Having passed over from earth to the heavens, O crowned athletes, ye chorus of the victorious martyrs of the Church, ask for us salvation and deliverance from misfortunes, passions and evil circumstances.

Rending asunder the bonds of death, the Savior hath given victory over death to His martyrs, for, warmed by the cold, the forty sang, begging salvation for all the faithful.

Through prayer the divine choir of passion-bearers doth manifestly drive the assaults of dangers, the attacks of the passions and the temptations of the demons away from those who hymn Christ forever.

*Theotokion:* Mortals given over to the dust of mortality and to corruption hast thou alone raised up, O pure Mistress, Virgin Theotokos, having given birth to Christ our God, the Author of life.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Stripped naked and beaten with stones for Christ’s sake, ye endured the cold air of winter, icy water and breaking of your limbs; and having been consumed by fire, O ye forty martyrs, ye shone forth in the rushing river like beacons.

Having acquired the Cross as a staff of divine power, the forty athletes cried out to Christ: “O Master, almighty Conqueror, crown us by Thine own hand, that we may all magnify Thee unceasingly with hymns!”

The pain of the ice and boundless cruelty of the cold did ye endure, O forty martyrs; but paradise is sweet, for the bosom of the Patriarch Abraham doth warm you in the eternal mansions.

Having prevailed through sufferings and received crowns from the divine right hand of the Master, O forty martyrs, pray ye now that peace be granted to the world and victory and salvation unto us.

*Theotokion:* The multitudes of angels entreat thy Son, O Virgin Bride and Mother. Accept thou our supplication, O thou who alone art the hope of the faithful; grant peace to the world, and victory and salvation unto us that love thee.

Canon II

*Irmos: The same as that of the preceding canon.*

Supernatural illumination and ineffable joy and glory have ye been vouchsafed to receive; and now, O soldiers of Christ, ye forty martyrs, from temptations, misfortunes and the wickedness of the enemy deliver those who honor you with love.

Having received power and might from the heavens, O ye who are most rich, fellow prisoners of Christ, ye have become dispellers of falsehood, driving away all the ephemeral gloom of idolatry and enlightening the world, O forty martyrs.

Adorned with the comeliness of an honorable martyrdom, and sharing in life divine, O forty martyrs, warriors of Christ, ye truly rejoice, united to the most radiant and pure Light.

Standing now before Christ with the boldness of piety, and thus illumined with the light of the Godhead, O glorious forty martyrs, earnestly beseech Him, that those who praise you may be enlightened with thrice-radiant splendor.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, portal of divine Light, with the immaterial rays of thy light illumine the manifest twilight of my soul, and vouchsafe that I who magnify thee faithfully and lovingly with hymns, O pure one, may be delivered from the everlasting fire.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Let us hymn as is meet the company of forty, the victorious regiment, the array of the holy martyrs, for by fire, ice and water they have put to shame the hordes of the adversary and have received crowns of glory from Christ the Savior.

Glory...: Another exapostilarion—

Let the forty-member choir of the forty who were martyred for the all-divine Trinity and the four-fold virtues, by the four elements: fire, air, water and earth, be hymned with divine songs, for they suffered for Christ, the Master of all.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O Virgin Mother who, though a maiden, gavest birth unto the Master of all things and all creation: rescue me from the passions which torment me, and lead me to the radiance of the loving-kindness and to the most beautiful Pascha of thy risen Son.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...”—

Come ye, O brethren, and with praises let us hymn the regiment of martyrs which was consumed by fire and cold, and with burning zeal burned up the winter of deception, the most valorous army, the most sanctified company, the unvanquished and invincible protection, the rampart and protectors of the faith, the divine choir of the forty martyrs who mightily entreat Christ, the Mediator of the Church, that He send down upon our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

Rejoice, mighty and courageous assembly, victorious regiment, pillars of piety, warriors of Christ, steadfast and invincible swordsmen, truly divine, most mighty of mind and manly of soul, holy choir desired of God, divinely elect company, O ye forty martyrs equal in suffering, and equal also in character, and who received equal crowns: Entreat Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy!

Rejoice, victorious multitude, who with valor were courageous in battle, ye stars who passed through fire and cold, who broke asunder the water’s ice, who have rendered the earth heavenly and illumined all, and who are now warmed in the bosom of Abraham and join chorus with the armies of the angels, O forty martyrs, ye flowers emitting the fragrance of spiritual diffusion: Entreat Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory..., the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone —

O athletes of Christ, ye have rendered the most honorable Fast most radiant by the commemoration of your glorious suffering; for, being forty in number, ye hallow the forty days of Lent, emulating the Savior’s suffering in your own suffering for Christ. Wherefore, as ye are possessed of boldness, pray that we in the world may attain unto the Resurrection on the third day of God, the Savior of our souls.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

We, the faithful bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we glorify thee as is meet, for thou art the impregnable city, the insuperable rampart, the steadfast intercessor and refuge of our souls.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Triodion; and Glory..., in Tone II—

Chanting a hymn unto the Savior, the forty martyrs have given the faithful to drink from the cup of truth which is filled with their blood, with the fire of their torments and icy waters; for, though one in mind, they offered themselves to Christ in many bodies. And the godly mother of a Christ-loving son, bearing him upon her shoulder, said: “Come, O athlete, and suffer with the rest!”

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O impassible portal mystically sealed, blessed Virgin Theotokos: Accept thou our supplications and bear them to thy Son and God, that through thee He may save our souls.

Then, “It is good to give praise unto the Lord...,” Trisagion, troparion, litany, and three full prostrations, the First Hour with its kathisma, and the dismissal.

The Third, Sixth and Ninth Hours, with their kathismata, at the proper time, and the Beatitudes quickly, and the rest. At each Hour, three full ­prostrations.

ON THE SAME DAY, AT VESPERS

After the usual kathisma, on “Lord, I have cried...,” we appoint 10 stichera: 6 from the Triodion, and 4 for the martyrs—

*In Tone I:* The choir of forty-fold splendor, the whole army assembled by God, hath shone forth upon the Fast in their honorable sufferings, illumining and enlightening our souls. *Twice*

*In Tone II:* The martyrs considered the lake to be as paradise, and winter to be as the heat of day, O Christ God; and thoughts of the tyrants’ threats did not daunt them. Valiant, they feared not the increase of tortures, having acquired the weapon of the Cross; and therewith, as mighty, they vanquished the foe, for which they have received crowns of grace.

Who will not hymn the choir of the martyrs forty in number? For they entered the waters of the lake boldly, and, huddling together in the cold, they chanted a hymn unto the Lord: “Nay, in the rivers art Thou wroth against us, O Lord? Nay, in the rivers art Thou wroth against us, O Thou Who lovest mankind? Lighten Thou the oppression and bitterness of the wind, for our feet are empurpled with our own blood. But lead us into thine everlasting habitations, O God, and let the bosom of Abraham warm us!”

Glory..., in the same tone—

Prophetically David cried aloud in the Psalms: We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment! And ye, O martyrs of Christ, fulfilling the word in very deed, passed through fire and water and entered into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, pray, O ye forty athletes, that we be given great mercy.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

All my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God. Shelter me beneath thy protection.

After the Entrance \(with the Gospel\), Prokimenon and readings as set forth in the Lenten Triodion, and Let my prayer be set forth…:

Prokimenon of the saints, in Tone V—

Thou, O Lord, shalt keep us and shalt preserve us from this generation, and for evermore.

*Stichos:* Save me, O Lord, for a righteous man there is no more; for truths have diminished from the sons of men.

Reading from the Epistle to the Hebrews, §331 \(Heb 12:1-10\)

Brethren, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith; Who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider Him Who endured such contradiction of sinners against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children: My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked by Him: for whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of His holiness.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; chant ye unto His name, give glory in praise of Him.

*Stichos:* For Thou hast proved us, O God, and by fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire.

Reading from the Gospel according to Matthew, §80 \(Matt 20:1-16\)

The Lord spake this parable: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man who is a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace, and said unto them: “Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you.” And they went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them: “Why stand ye here all the day idle?” They say unto him: “Because no man hath hired us.” He saith unto them: “Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.” So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward: “ Call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first.” And when they came who were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny. And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the house, saying: “These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, who have borne the burden and heat of the day.” But he answered one of them, and said: “Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen.”

Communion verse —

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

