THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH

THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEOPHANES THE CONFESSOR OF MOUNT SIGRIANA

\(for this day we also provide services for St. Gregory the Dialogist and St. Symeon the New Theologian\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...”—

O divinely wise father Theophanes, called the namesake of the theophany of Christ, thou didst follow in His life-bearing steps, and didst forsake all the beauties of life, directing thy gaze towards Him Whom thou didst desire, O thou of great renown, being deified by beauty and divine inclinations towards Him and excellent perfections.

O divinely wise father Theophanes, abiding in affliction of flesh, thou didst steadfastly endure bitter exiles, taking no pity on thy body, for the sake of the precious icons, O all-praised one, banished by the wrath of Leo; and mocking him thou didst make foolish his counsels and his vain thoughts and his pernicious mind.

Truly the Bestower of good things hath richly granted to thee rewards for thy pangs: to expel demons and to heal afflictions, imparting power, O most blessed one, and vouchsafing thee ineffable joys where the angelic ranks join chorus, gazing continually upon the countenance of the Almighty.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone and melody—

Rejoice, chariot of divine light, most radiant star, and tabernacle of sanctity! The Light hath shone forth upon us from thine all-pure womb, illumining the ends of the earth and sanctifying them with His grace! Rejoice, thou beginning of salvation, O all-pure one! Rejoice, report and saying awesome to those who trust in thee!

Stavrotheotokion—

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who sustainest all creation, being lifted up upon the Tree, dost die, granting life to all!” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she beheld uplifted on the Cross the God and man Who ineffably had shone forth from her.

AT MATINS

Canon to the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “Theophanes hymneth thee, Theophanes,” the composition of Theophanes the Branded, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Aflame with piety, O father, thou didst follow in the steps of God Who revealed Himself in the flesh; for in receiving a name derived from His revelation, which was truly fitting for thee, thou wast prefigured as providence.

Delighting in the most desired love of thy Master, thou didst spurn earthly love; and, united to divine love, thou didst count the beauty of life as naught, O most blessed one.

His onslaught savage, the tyrant Leo persecuted the elect, unable to endure the sight of Christ’s icon being honored; and he condemned thee to exile with them, O Theophanes.

*Theotokion:* O Lord, the portal of the condescension to us of Thee Who art mystically called the Orient, the Sun and the Light, the God-man in two natures, hath supernaturally shone forth.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou wast seen to be full of divine light, O blessed Theophanes, having united thyself in love to Him Whom thou didst desire. Wherefore, we honor thy glorious memory.

Denouncing the commands of the ungodly Leo, thou didst piously hold to the traditions of the Church. Wherefore, Christ glorified thee with miracles.

Strengthened by hope and love, the weakness of thy flesh made firm by strength of spirit, O venerable one, thou didst turn thy body over to God as a fellow slave.

*Theotokion:* He Who in the beginning out of dust fashioned me a man is for my sake conceived in thy womb, setting aright the ancient fall, O all-immaculate one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the ­Wisdom...”—

A lover of the love of Jesus, thou didst repel pleasures and the tumult of life, and becoming a monk, didst live on earth as an angel of heaven, and dost pour forth gifts of wonders, O venerable one. Wherefore, with faith we praise thee on the day of thy radiant and holy memory, and cry aloud to thee in harmony: O God-bearing Theophanes, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love honor thy holy memory!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, gavest birth without seed to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, and thou hast given suck unto the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy Offspring.

Stavrotheotokion—

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, cried out, weeping and, bitterly lamenting, exclaimed: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss of mercy, inexhaustible Wellspring: Have pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

A dwelling-place hath been prepared in heaven for thee as an athlete of Christ, O glorious one; for, rejoicing, thou didst pass from thine earthly tabernacle, crying out to thy Master: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a crown-bearer, O God-bearing and blessed Theophanes; for thou didst not refuse to show honor to the precious icon of Christ. Wherefore, thou also didst cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Opposing the command of the ungodly tyrant, O venerable one, thou didst in no wise pay heed to the affliction of thy flesh, crying aloud to the Creator: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou hast been magnified by miracles, O God-bearer; for Christ hath rewarded thee for thine endurance. Wherefore, thou pourest forth healings as from a wellspring upon those who ask, O most sacred one.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone art shown to be more exalted than the angels; for thou gavest birth unto the Angel of great Counsel, the Word Who enlighteneth all who cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With most pious discourse didst thou proclaim the commandments of Faith, O venerable Theophanes, shining with the Spirit.

In accordance with the Master’s command, with divine wisdom thou didst most abundantly distribute thy wealth, O all-praised one, following those who lived in poverty.

Possessing a soul in the image of its Creator, thou didst bow down before the most pure icon of the Master, venerating it with love.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth unto the timeless Light Who came under time, O Mother of God, and thou didst enlighten the world.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Guide my life toward virtue, O venerable one; and, smoothing the path of asceticism with thy supplications, vouchsafe me to tread it rightly and with strength, O blessed father.

Thou hast entered into the glory of the martyrs, O father Theophanes, for, opposing the persecutors, thou didst honor the icons of the Mother of God and the martyrs.

Thou didst reach the end of thy life in chastity, didst possess wisdom, courage and righteousness, O venerable one, and wast shown to be adorned with the diadem of the virtues.

*Theotokion:* By an ineffable word, the holy Word sanctified thee wholly, O Theotokos, making His abode in thy sanctified womb. Him do thou entreat, that thy servants be saved.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...”—

Receiving divine revelation from on high, with diligence thou didst depart from the midst of the tumult of life; and, having become a solitary, O venerable one, thou didst receive the power to work wonders and the dignity of a prophet, having deprived thyself of wealth and wife.

*Ikos:* Preferring naught on earth, rejoicing thou didst follow after Christ Who cried out to take His yoke zealously upon thy shoulder, and thou didst obtain peace within thy soul, which do thou likewise send down upon me, who am poor and slothful, who talk yet accomplish naught, who revel yet in the things of this life, and marvel at how thou hast escaped them all, having deprived thyself of wealth and wife.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Having acquired and received that which is in the image and likeness of God, thou wast adorned with them both through thy manner of most splendid life, O father, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou wast adorned with a crown of confession, O father, and by thy deeds didst denounce the words of the ungodly; and thou didst proclaim to the faithful, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

With most steadfast ardor of mind thou didst patiently endure the pangs of thy body, O father, giving thanks unto thy Master, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* All of us, the faithful, hymn thee as the pure Theotokos and Queen of all creation, and we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice! Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Seeing the firmness of thine opposition, O blessed one, the most wicked tyrant Leo once again cruelly condemned thee to exile; but with gladness thou didst endure this, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Perceiving that honor rendered to icons ascendeth to their Prototype, as a most lawful athlete thou didst run with haste to the arena; and, shown to be a victor, thou didst receive a crown, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The Lord of all gave thee a heavenly tabernacle in place of an earthly one, for instead of imprisonment thou didst discover the broad expanse of joy in the sweetness of Paradise, crying out with the martyrs: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast radiant with the noetic light of the divine Spirit, O blessed Theophanes; wherefore, thou dost now pour forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee in faith, that venerate thy holy shrine with love, and cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* He Who manifestly upholdeth and sustaineth all creation by divine power, the Ever-existent One, Who is equally enthroned with the Father and the divine Spirit, is held in thine arms as a babe, O all-pure one. To Him do we cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

All of thy riches didst thou shower upon the poor, O God-bearer, and thou didst manifestly receive the righteousness which shone forth within thee, reaping that which abideth eternally instead of that which corrupteth.

By the power of the Comforter thou healest infirmities, O most blessed one, and through His activity thou dost manifestly drive the demons away. Wherefore, beholding this, we, the faithful, bless thee, O all-blessed God-bearer.

The splendid day of thy repose summoneth all the faithful to partake of sanctification, O divinely wise one; and, rejoicing, we now celebrate it, O most sacred one.

Thou givest a bounteous gift unto me who have zealously woven words in praise of thee, O divinely wise one, showing me to share thy way of life as I share thy name, through thy God-pleasing entreaties, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* The law of praises is abrogated by thy divine glory, O Virgin; but as thou art good and kind of heart, accept the praise of those who hymn thee, bestowing upon them cleansing of sins, O Bride of God.

