On the Same Day, The 12th of the MONTH OF MARCH

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Symeon the New Theologian

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O venerable father Symeon, having abandoned the things of life as of no account, thou didst desire Christ alone, and Him alone didst thou acquire: thou didst cleave unto Him, serving Him alone. Wherefore, thou hast been illumined with ineffable light and, ever delighting in Him, thou hast shone forth in the virtues. O beacon for monks, lamp of beaten gold, lightning illumining men’s souls, entreat Christ God, that we be saved!

O father Symeon, thou peer of the angels, standing continually before the joyous Light, thou beholdest what the angels see, delighting in the never-waning effulgence which on Tabor once shone forth upon the three disciples. Thou hast illumined the ends of the earth like the sun with the splendor of thy corrections, warming thy children with beams of Orthodoxy, and removing the darkness of the defilement of sin. O fervent advocate, entreat Christ God, that we be saved!

O blessed father Symeon, leaning noetically against the breast of the Lord, thou didst receive the treasure of theology and wast yoked with the first among theologians, the great Apostle John, being also an emulator of the holy hierarch Gregory; for thou didst receive their title. O great father and theologian, recounter of the ineffable mysteries of God, thou radiant model of virtue, pray thou ever, that we be saved!

Glory…, in Tone III—

Come, O brethren, let us magnify the initiate of the mysteries of theology! For, lo! proclaiming ineffable things, he hath made clear for us the dogmas of the mystery of salvation. For, pouring forth springs of tears, he cleansed the eye of his soul; and gazing upon the never-setting Light, he was filled with the waters of heavenly theology, like a river overflowing with the waters of grace, gladdening the souls of the divinely wise, who cry out to him with love: Cleanse us of the mire of many sins, O venerable father, and give us that water to drink which floweth unto the life of everlasting gladness!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Him Who was born of thee hanging upon the Tree, the most immaculate one exclaimed, crying aloud: “O my sweet Child, where hath the radiant beauty gone of Thee Who hath done good to the human race?”

If it be decided that a troparion should be chanted, we use the following, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, and becamest a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. O Symeon our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I, Ambrose, hymn the glorious Symeon in song”,

in Tone V—

Ode I

*Irmos:* To God the Savior, Who led His people in the sea with dryshod feet and drowned Pharaoh and all his army, let us chant alone, for He is glorious.

Standing ever before God the Savior, O most honored one, remember us, thy children, whom thou hast caused to bud forth by thy discourses.

Purifying thy noetic eye with streams of tears, thou didst behold a great light; and delighting therein, ask for us divine effulgence.

Having disdained the darkness of sin and rejected the gloom of the passions, thou wast enlightened by lightning-flashes of theology, speaking and revealing ineffable things.

*Theotokion:* Let the pure Mistress, who alone hath delivered us from the curse and death, be hymned as the glory and adornment of mortals.

Ode III

*Irmos:* By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, establish Thou my mind, that I may hymn and glorify Thy saving ascension.

Having furnished thy mind with wings by fasting, vigil and prayer, thou didst soar high above the heavens, O Symeon, thou model for life.

Having achieved control over the passions, thou wast adorned on earth with rich poverty, having in thy heart a treasure: the grace of the Spirit.

Emulating the life of the angels, thou wast vouchsafed angelic light, and illumined thereby, as with a surety of splendor to come, thou wast pure in all thy life.

*Theotokion:* With glorification we ever bless thee, the joy and glory of the people who are saved; for through thee have we again been clothed in glory.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Forsaking the glory of an earthly king, thou didst enclose thyself in a narrow cell. Instead of glorious vesture thou didst clothe thyself in the robe of immortality, and instead of sweet foods didst ever abide in fasting. Wherefore, thou wast a guide to salvation for men, and didst direct the assemblies of monks, edifying them with discourses, and all the more being a model for them in thy manner of life, teaching and instructing them in the blameless monastic life. O venerable Symeon our father, ever pray for us who celebrate thy most honored memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As thou art truly the Theotokos and Mother, pray thou with boldness to thy Son and our God, that He especially preserve this city, which fleeth to thy protection, which hath its dominion in thee, having recourse to thee, its refuge and bulwark, the only intercessor of the human race.

Stavrotheotokion—

The Virgin and Ewe-lamb, beholding upon the Cross the Lamb Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, cried out, wounded with shafts of grief, exclaiming in pain: “What is this new mystery? How is it that Thou diest, Who alone art the Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising with Thee our fallen ancestor!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of the power of the Cross, that paradise hath been opened thereby, and I cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Utterly having spurned the flattery of the world, thou didst richly receive the grace of the Comforter, O Symeon, boast of the fathers.

Even if the enemy assailed thee, bringing many temptations to bear upon thee, yet did he not break the firmness of thy faith, O venerable one.

Grinding down thy body with great struggles, accustomed to obedience and prayer, thou didst render thy soul mighty against the passions.

*Theotokion:* Declaring beforehand the sign of thine ineffable birthgiving, O blessed one, the prophet cried aloud: “Behold, a Virgin shall ­conceive in her womb, and shall bear a Son: ­Emmanuel!”

Ode V

*Irmos:* Rising at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! for Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Emulating the life of the angels, thou didst exhibit a wondrous manner of life, and divine light illumined thee when thou didst celebrate the liturgy.

Casting off pleasure in bitter sin, on earth thou didst show thyself to be a resident of paradise; and while yet walking among mortals, thou didst mystically enjoy incorrupt effulgence.

O venerable father, thou peer of the angels, standing before the throne of the King of glory, remember those here who joyfully celebrate thy most honored memory.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mistress, save us, thy servants, for we flee to thee, O intercessor and defender of the faithful. Help thou us!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The abyss engulfed me, and the sea monster became a tomb for me; yet I cried unto Thee Who lovest mankind, and Thy right hand saved me, O Lord.

Desiring Christ alone, thou didst depart from the imperial palace, and instead of imperial secretaries didst have angels participating in thy supplications.

O Symeon the New Theologian and Symeon the pious, make entreaty for us, your children, who praise you with love!

Accustomed to ready obedience, thou didst in nowise pay heed to thyself; and upborne on thy tears thou didst sail to the calm haven of the Author of ineffable tranquility.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, thou glory of men and joy of angels, we ever glorify thee, for thou hast magnified our face and united us in immortality with the hosts on high.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

The Church of Christ rejoiceth today, celebrating thy memory with splendor. Thou hast adorned it with thy discourses and prayers, hast guided the children of faith to the mansions of heaven, and hast shone with ineffable light, receiving radiance from Christ God, our Sun, O Symeon, our venerable father.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Blessed is the God of our fathers, Who saved the children who chanted unto Him in the fiery furnace.

With the streams of thy tears thou didst quench the furnace of sin, crying out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

As thou wast a standard of theology and a teacher of chastity, thou hast taught us to chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou wast an instrument of the Holy Spirit, ever chanting the divine hymn: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* He whom the angels and the souls of the righteous hymn let us mortals ever bless in song.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The Son and God, Who was begotten of the Father before the ages, and in latter times became incarnate of the Virgin Mother, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Ever mindful of hell and death, O father, thou didst abstain from sin in every way; and now thou dwellest for all eternity in the kingdom of heaven.

Thou didst easily navigate the briny sea of life with the sail of asceticism, and thou dost now rejoice in the calm harbor of paradise for all ages.

All the days of thy life thou didst have streams of tears pouring from thine eyes, O venerable one, and now ineffable light doth illumine thee for all ages.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! Rejoice, O Ever-virgin! Rejoice, O Mother of God! Rejoice, O Queen of heaven, for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* With oneness of mind, we, the faithful, magnify thee, the Mother of God, who, in manner past understanding and recounting, ineffably gavest birth in time to the Timeless One.

As a model for thy disciples during thy lifetime, thou dost now nurture our souls with thy discourses, ever teaching us even after thy repose.

O Symeon our father, accept our praise and the lifting up of our hands with thy wonted kindness, entreating God Who loveth mankind, that our souls be saved.

Emulating the fasting of John the Baptist, thou didst lay waste to thy body with many struggles; wherefore, thou hast now received the rich reward of thy labors, remaining on earth, thy body incorrupt.

*Theotokion:* Seeing thee who alone art pure in these earthly vales, the Creator received flesh of thee; and, deifying man, He hath given him life eternal.

