THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH

THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM

AT VESPERS:

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs....”—

Shining forth like a star, thou didst illumine the faithful with the sacred splendors of thy dogmas, and didst cast heresies into darkness. And utterly victorious, as a servant thou didst increase the talant given thee; and having been well-pleasing unto God, thou didst surrender thy spirit into His hands, O Cyril blessed of God.

In the wisdom of thy words and the splendor of thy manner of life didst thou shine forth like a most radiant star amid the council of the fathers, O right wondrous one, and didst choke with the cords of grace the godless Macedonius who was insanely blasphemous and manifestly committed iniquity against the holy Spirit of God Who giveth life unto all.

The pernicious reasoning of the most mindless Manes didst thou put to shame, denouncing most wisely and well the vile teachings of his foolishness, O chief among teachers, splendor of priests, godly champion of the Church of Christ. Wherefore, in gladness we celebrate thy holy repose.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone and melody—

O Virgin who gavest birth to God my Savior, by thy supplications grant that I may escape impending torment and to receive grace divine, excellent repentance, saving healing, streams of tears, and mindfulness of the dread and terrible hour and the judgement which is impartial.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The Ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, when she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, marvelled and exclaimed: “What is this new thing that I see, O my Son most desired? How hath the iniquitous and unbelieving assembly recompensed Thee, which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? But glory to Thy condescension, O Master!”

AT MATINS:

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Cyril, the primate of Jerusalem,” the composition of Theophanes the Branded, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Having adorned thy soul with ideal virtues, thou didst render it receptive to the grace of the Holy Spirit; hence thou hast let gush an abyss of wisdom which drieth up the depths of heresy, O Cyril.

Thou didst train thy mind to transcend material things, showing thyself to be a colleague of the immaterial servants of God, and with the fire of thy words thou didst utterly consume the tinder of heresy, O Cyril, ever-vigilant beacon of the Church.

As the perfume of Christ, with the sweetly wafting fragrance of thy words, O most wise one, thou didst dispel the unbearable stench of all the heresies of Manes, the namesake of insanity, and as a pastor most true didst drive it far away.

*Theotokion:* From the mire of the passions, from the threefold waves of evil thoughts, from the darts of the wicked one, from every assault of the adversary, save the souls of those who hymn thine ineffable birthgiving, O pure and all-immaculate Theotokos.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Radiant with the splendors of spiritual wisdom, to those on earth, O father, thou didst splendidly clarify the doctrine of the thrice-luminous Godhead of the Trinity, by Whom we have been delivered from the darkness of deception.

Thou wast shown to be a harp of the all-holy Spirit, O divinely wise one, playing a hymn of the manifestation of Christ; and thou didst proclaim Him to be in two natures, delighting our souls.

Thou didst show forth thy soul as a habitation of sanctity, wherein the Father, the Son and the life-creating Spirit supernaturally made their abode, to Whom we chant: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Not even a heavenly intelligence can describe thy birthgiving which passeth understanding, O Maiden; for thou didst conceive in thy womb the Word, the primal Intelligence Who fashioned all things by His word.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Enriched with the wisdom of discourse, thou didst pour forth living rivers of teaching, and didst water every thought of the pious therewith, and with the staff of God didst tend the flock on green pastures, and didst nurture it with divine understanding. Wherefore, as pastor, great teacher and helper of the faithful, we praise thee, O holy hierarch Cyril, crying aloud: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee as the Virgin who alone among women gave birth in the flesh without seed unto God; for the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, and thou gavest suck unto the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and of men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy Offspring!

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, weeping, exclaimed and, bitterly lamenting, cried aloud: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity, and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine suffering!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, and the earth hath been filled with Thy glory, O Christ. Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thy heart, which received an abyss of teaching which drowneth the minds of the ungodly, hath given rise unto a stream of heavenly wisdom, O venerable one.

Thou didst preach the Godhead of three Hypostases, one Power, one Essence, one Will, and didst dry up the torrent of the deception of polytheism, O Cyril.

Possessed of a mind instructed by God, O blessed one, thou didst openly denounce Manes’ most foolish mind of clay.

*Theotokion:* As one more exalted than all other creatures, O pure one, thou didst conceive the Author of creation, giving birth supernaturally unto Him Who hath renewed our nature.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With the staff of thy precious wisdom, O blessed and holy hierarch, thou didst guide thy flock to the water of Orthodox worship.

Thy discourse, made radiant with the divine light, O Cyril, dispersed the gloom of the ignorance of those who were enlightened in Jerusalem.

*Theotokion:* The night of the passions and the gloom of evils covereth my soul. Enlighten me, I pray thee, O all-pure one who gavest birth unto the Bestower of light.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

A river full of the life-bearing waters of the Spirit, thou didst issue forth as from another Eden, O holy hierarch, and dost water the furrows of the Church.

With the radiance of thy words thou dost save men as from the tempest of the sea of impiety, O most sacred one, beckoning them to the calm haven of Orthodoxy.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast made man’s earthly nature heavenly, O all immaculate Maiden, and hast fashioned anew that which was corrupted. Wherefore, we glorify thee with unceasing cries.

Kontakion, in Tone I—

With thy tongue and by divine inspirations thou didst enlighten thy people to honor the One Trinity indivisible in essence and distinguished as to Persons. Wherefore, rejoicing, we celebrate thine all-holy memory, presenting thee to God as an intercessor.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Having the fire of the fear of God within thy mind, O father, thou didst reduce the tinder of pleasures to ashes, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Having quenched the flame of the passions with tears, O blessed one, thou didst maintain the luster of thy soul undimmed, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Possessing a living stream in thy soul through the grace of the Spirit, O divinely wise father, thou hast poured forth rivers of doctrine, which give drink unto the Church, which piously honoreth thee.

*Theotokion:* Our holy Lord, the living God Who dwelleth in the saints and took flesh for Himself of thy flesh, O Theotokos, hath wholly sanctified thee.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Having chased the slumber of indifference from the eyelids of thy soul, O blessed one, thou hast now fallen into the sleep which befitteth the righteous, and hast passed on to the day of never-waning light.

With the lightning flashes of thy words thou hast utterly consumed the tinder of heresy, O ever-memorable one, and hast enlightened the faithful to worship the One Trinity of Persons which is one in nature.

Having sanctified thyself with fasts, thou didst offer up the unbloody sacrifice unto Him Who became mortal for thy sake, O Cyril, as a godly hierarch and minister of the ineffable mysteries.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the curse of our foremother by thee, O pure Mother of God, blessed Mistress, we bless thine all-holy birth-giving, O most glorious and all-pure Virgin.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Desirous of beholding the ineffable glory of Christ, O holy hierarch, thou didst endeavor to slay the soul-destroying passions, and to make of thy heart a receptacle of the greater and higher wisdom. Wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.

In the firmament of the Church hath Christ the Sun set thee as a most radiant star, O Cyril, illumining the hearts of those who keep thy splendid memory with faith, O venerable one.

Thou art one who hath conversed and ministered with angels; for, having lived on earth as one incorporeal, O father, thou wast shown to be a companion of the venerable and a peer of the holy hierarchs. And as thou joinest them in chorus, be thou mindful of us.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, who wast born of a barren woman at the behest of Him Who by His will transformeth all things, show forth my heart, which is barren of godly virtues, to be fruitful, that I may hymn thee, O all-hymned one.

