The 26th Day of the MONTH OF MARCH

Synaxis of the Archangel Gabriel

\(for this day we provide also a service for St. Irenæus of Sirmium\)

Vespers is served as prescribed for the evening of the 25th, as indicated in the preceding entry, or as appointed by the Typicon.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, on certain days, according to the Typicon, there is chanted along with the troparion of the feast that of the archangel, in Tone IV—

O supreme commander of the armies of heaven, we ever entreat thee, unworthy as we are, that by thy supplications thou mayest guard us with the shelter of the wings of thine immaterial glory, preserving us who fall down and earnestly cry: Deliver us from misfortunes, in that thou art the leader of the ranks of the powers on high.

The appointed kathismata, and the sessional hymns from the Triodion. Psalm 50.

Canon of the Theotokos, with 4 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the archangel, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is the \[Greek\] alphabet, in Tone VI—

Ode I

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Today Gabriel, the splendid leader of the heavenly ranks, hath been sent to the Virgin, crying out: “Rejoice, O immaculate Bride, for through thee is come the Creator and Lord of all!”

*The Theotokos:* “I wish to understand thy strange salutation,” the Virgin said, “for the joy which thou hast uttered is a saying strange to mankind. Speak thou clearly, teaching me.”

*The Angel: “* I shall speak most clearly, standing before thee with all reverence, O all-pure one; and do thou incline thine ear, for the power of the Most High shall come upon thee, and thou shalt be inhabited by the all-accomplishing Spirit.”

Canon of the Archangel, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

I beseech thee, O archangel of the Lord, as thou art divine and immaterial light through sharing immaterially in the uttermost Light: Illumine my mind by thy supplications, that I may hymn thee.

In gladness let us form a divine choir today, honoring the first among the incorporeal intelligences, who hath announced the ineffable Joy Who, in His goodness, hath come into the world.

Having thee, O Gabriel, as an intercessor most great, a helper before God, a rampart and confirmation, we who love and praise thee are delivered from misfortunes and the evil of the serpent.

*Theotokion:* When Gabriel beheld thee, the pure and most immaculate one, he cried out to thee with splendor: “Rejoice, O Mistress, thou salvation of men who knewest not wedlock, boast and pride of the angels!”

Ode III

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

*The Theotokos:* “I see now that thou speakest falsely, O angel, for how can a nature which is material, corruptible and earthly contain the Immaterial One Who is clothed in the light of incorruption?”

*The Angel:* “Sensibly hast thou accused me, O pure one, yet such is His good pleasure. But be thou convinced by the bush which, burning, was in no wise consumed by the fire, prefiguring thine ineffable birthgiving.”

*The Theotokos:* “Thou criest out to me words of life; yet the smoking mountain of old, which received God, persuadeth me that material nature is unable to receive the Immaterial One.”

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Thou wast seen to be a secondary luminary, O Gabriel, illumined immaterially by partaking of the most immaterial Light, ever illumining the material men who hymn thee as one truly immaterial.

Having revealed to us the great mystery, thou wast vouchsafed the greatest of fame, O greatest of the angels, whereby we who honor thee greatly have been caught up from the earth to the greatest of heights.

From heaven hast thou manifested thyself unto all who ever seek thee with love; and thou hast stilled the tempest of the passions and tribulations which besetteth us, O Gabriel, supreme commander.

*Theotokion:* Relating the mystery hidden from of old, O Maiden, Gabriel once cried out to thee: “Rejoice, O palace of God wherein, making His abode, he hath deified all men, in that He is compassionate!”

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

To thee alone, O glorious Gabriel, who hast the primacy among the incorporeal ministers of God, was entrusted the awesome mystery which was appointed before time began: the ineffable birthgiving of the holy Virgin. And thou didst proclaim to her: “Rejoice, O thou who art full of joy!” Wherefore with gladness we, the faithful, ever call thee blessed, as is fitting.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode IV

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

*The Angel:* “Thy womb is become the chariot of the Sun, O all-pure one; and for men thou givest birth to the never-waning Light,” Gabriel proclaimed to the Virgin with all joy.

*The Theotokos:* “Depart from my doors, and speak not words whose fulfillment thou canst in nowise demonstrate, O supreme commander! Why dost thou trouble my mind and soul, saying these things to me?”

*The Angel:* “The prophets, the clarions of God, were vouchsafed to perceive the depth of the mystery from afar, O most immaculate one. I am the minister thereof, and I stand at thy doors.”

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God — the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin — the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Of old, O right wondrous Gabriel, thou didst stand, illumining the Prophet Daniel with divine communion, expounding the manifestation of incomprehensible things through the Spirit.

With lips of clay we joyfully praise thee who art fiery by nature. By thy divine mediations, O Gabriel, rescue us from the ever-burning fire.

Arrayed in divine vesture brighter than the sun in unapproachable glory, O supreme commander of the servants of God, thou standest in gladness before the King of heaven.

*Theotokion:* Understanding thee to be wholly purified by the Spirit, O most immaculate one, Gabriel openly crieth out to thee: Rejoice, O deliverance from the curse and restoration of the ancestors of men!

Ode V

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

*The Theotokos:* “I behold thee radiant with angelic splendor, O angel,” said the all-immaculate one, “yet I am reluctant to believe without hesitation, not knowing first every particular.”

*The Angel:* “The Creator, seeing human nature corrupted, hath been well-pleased to make His abode within thee, O pure one, revealing now in awesome manner the mystery which hath been hidden from before time began.”

*The Theotokos:* “I have been betrothed unto Joseph, but hitherto have not united with him, O archangel. Therefore, not having known a man, how can I give birth? The words thou speakest unto me are contrary to nature.”

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Made luminous through communing with the primal Mind, thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary crying out with the countless ranks of angels: Holy is God the Creator of all, the Son Who is equally without beginning, and the Spirit Who is equally enthroned with Them.

Thine aspect is fiery, thy beauty all-wondrous, striking every thought with awe, O Gabriel most great. Great is thy glory, O leader of the divine incorporeal ones, adornment of all who hymn thee with faith.

Of old, when the godly Zachariah beheld thee as he stood during the time of censing, he was struck mute; for he did not believe the dread announcement which thou didst proclaim, O Gabriel, supreme commander.

*Theotokion:* As a temple of sanctity, O most immaculate one, at the cry of the Archangel Gabriel thou didst give birth to the most holy God Who resteth in His saints, Who sanctifieth all and rescueth us from evils.

Ode VI

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

*The Angel:* “Jesus, the Creator of all that existeth, doth not hold beings in slavery to laws, O Maiden. May the rod of Aaron, which grew without water, and hath prefigured that thou wilt give birth without knowing man, convince thee.”

*The Theotokos:* “Contemplating these thine awesome and honorable words, I marvel; and desiring to believe, I ponder the greatness of their eminence and am wholly abashed, O supreme commander.”

*The Angel:* “Wilt thou not submit to my words? Thee, O pure one, did Daniel foresee as the mountain from whence, without human hands, would be cut the Stone which will most mightily demolish the temples of the idols.”

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

The nations of the earth are unable to honor thee, the radiant and heavenly intelligence, who art most splendidly and ineffably illumined with divine effulgence which passeth understanding.

By thy radiant entreaties to the Theotokos rescue those who hymn thee from the darkness of the passions, O supreme commander of the fiery servants of God, O ray far brighter than the sun.

By thy supplications to the Creator of all, O archangel, confound the counsels of the pagans, make firm the Orthodox Faith, and bring an end to schisms within the Church.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast obedient to the divine words of Gabriel, O pure one, and didst give birth in the flesh unto the Word Who is wholly without beginning hath delivered the world from folly.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII—

O supreme commander, thou glorious intercessor before and servant of the all-radiant, worshipful, all-accomplishing, infinite and awesome Trinity: Do thou now unceasingly pray that we be delivered from all tribulations and torments, that we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O protection of thy servants!

Ode VII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*The Theotokos:* “Thou hast said, O Gabriel, that the Incorporeal One will all-gloriously come into the world bodily. Say then plainly how my womb will contain Him Whose magnitude the heavens are unable to contain?”

*The Angel:* “I shall recount to thee. Understand, O most immaculate one: How did the tent of Abraham once receive and contain God, O all-pure one? Wherefore, be not doubtful now, but accept my salutation with love, in that thou art the joy of men.”

*The Theotokos:* “The magnitude of this matter troubleth me; but since it is the good pleasure of the All-good One to make His abode within me in manner past understanding, behold! I am preserved for Him as a temple pure in soul and body.”

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Once, in the midst of the temple, thou didst announce the birth of John to Zachariah, who stood chanting before God the Deliverer: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The all-glorious magnificence of thy temple most radiantly illumineth the souls of the faithful, O Gabriel, and compelleth them to cry aloud: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Illumined by mystically partaking of the primal Light, O supreme commander, thou hast been truly seen to be a secondary luminary, ever enlightening those who chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Gabriel the supreme commander was sent to announce joy unto thee, O pure Virgin Mother; and because of thee grief hath ceased, the curse hath truly withered away, and blessing hath blossomed forth for the faithful forever.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt ­supremely for all ages!

At the cry of the angel thou didst conceive the Light. Wherefore, to thee do we all cry out: Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, thou portal of the Light, vision hard to see, throne of the Most High!

Rejoice, perfection of the exalted mystery! Rejoice, manifestation of things hard to comprehend! Rejoice, unification of men to God! Rejoice, O Virgin, thou restoration of the fallen!

Rejoice, O mother of the Master, the Bestower of light! Rejoice, O haven for the tempest-tossed! Rejoice, O most immaculate one, true and fruitful vine! Rejoice, thou who hast put forth the Grapes of immortality!

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In gladness the sacred people hymn thee with sacred utterances; for thou dost announce to the Virgin, who is one of us, the all-accomplishing Word Who becometh incarnate as we are, in manner past understanding and recounting. Wherefore, we honor thee for all ages.

Uniting thyself immaterially to the great and primal Mind, O archangel, with thy fiery mouth thou dost chant the awesome hymns which all the choirs of the angels sing: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Manifestly adorned with divine glories, thou dost soar above those of heaven and of earth, accomplishing the divine desires of Christ the God of all, O Gabriel, leader of the angels and adornment of those who ever praise thee with faith.

Desiring to mingle with men in a fleshly hypostasis, the Word had thee go before Him and prepare a sacred palace, O sacred Gabriel, singing: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn the blessed Virgin as the beautiful throne of the King, as the one exalted above all created beings, as the one who gave being to Him Who is above being, Who hath deified men by the higher unification of her ineffable and awesome birthgiving.

Ode IX

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Rejoice, O honored and most blessed one, thou cause of joy and furrow of goodly growth who bearest the Nourisher of all! Rejoice, O all-pure one, wellspring of living water, thou jar and garden of God! Rejoice, O most immaculate one!

Rejoice, O cleansing of souls and bodies, through whom higher things flow forth upon men, thou cause of the deification of all! Rejoice, O light cloud who bearest the Sun Who illumineth the world with radiant effulgence!

We cry out to thee a hymn of joy: Rejoice, O pure one, boast of the martyrs and the apostles, all-glorious utterance of the prophets! Rejoice, thou adornment of hierarchs and the venerable, for whose sake the inhabitants of heaven rejoice with those of earth!

Canon of the Archangel

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Illumined with effulgences past understanding and deified in sacred manner, thou standest in awe before the throne of grace, ministering thereunto, and, seen as light, thou dost illumine those who honor thee with faith, O sacred Gabriel, thou supreme commander.

Thou art seen to be like the sky, adorned with divine radiances as with stars, and as a commander thou holdest an all-radiant scepter in thy hands; and dost pass over the whole earth, ever doing the will of the Master and rescuing the faithful from evils.

Still thou the cruel tempest of the barbarians which ever assaileth thy servants; cause schisms to cease within the Church; and grant deliverance from transgressions to those who hymn thee and victories to our civil authorities through thine intercession, O Gabriel.

O ye two all-comely and all-glorious, Michael and Gabriel: standing before the throne of divine glory, ask for all forgiveness of sins and release from evils, in that ye are intercessors and emulate the goodness of the Master in all.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving thou hast shone forth the Light of effulgence and illumined the whole world; and thou hast destroyed the prince of darkness, O most pure Theotokos, thou boast of the angels and salvation of all men who praise thee with unceasing voices.

On certain days, according to the prescriptions of the Typicon, the exapostilarion of the archangel is chanted: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast enlightened us…”—

O supreme commander of God, who hast arrayed thyself in the shelter of thy wings: protect me who have recourse unto thee; at my departure from this life, deliver me from the bitter tormentors, and save me by thine entreaties.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

The preëternal Mind made thee, O Gabriel, a secondary luminary through divine fellowship, illumining the whole universe and revealing unto us the great and truly divine mystery from of old of Him Who is incarnate in the Virgin’s womb, and Who, though incorporeal, became man to save men. *Twice*

Standing before the throne of the three-Sunned Godhead, richly shining forth with the divine effulgences unceasingly emitted thereby, O Gabriel, ­supreme commander, from the darkness of the passions deliver those on earth who join chorus joyfully and praise thee; and illumine them with enlightenment, O thou who prayest for our souls.

Bring low the arrogance of the Moslems who so often assail thy flock; bring an end to the schisms of the Church; still the tempest of countless temptations; deliver from tribulations and evil circumstances those who honor thee with love and have recourse to thy protection, O Gabriel, supreme commander, who prayest for our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone II—

Today Gabriel announceth to her who is full of grace: “Rejoice, O mother unwed who knewest not wedlock! Be not amazed by my strange appearance, neither be afraid; for I am an archangel! The serpent once deceived Eve; but now I announce joy unto thee: thou wilt remain incorrupt and wilt give birth to the Lord, O all-holy one!

On the Aposticha, the idiomelon of the Triodion, twice; the martyrion; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

