THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR

MATRONA OF THESSALONICA

AT VESPERS:

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As valiant among the martyrs....”—

With reason didst thou oppose the ferocity and naked savagery of the Jews, O divinely wise and manly-wise one, looking forward to the delight of things to come, which remaineth ever immutable for ages. This didst thou receive when thou didst depart from earth to the mansions of heaven and the indissoluble choir, O glorious one.

Adorned with the wounds of thy steadfast suffering, thou wast vouchsafed to behold the splendor of the kingdom and the beauteous comeliness of thy Bridegroom; and thou drewest nigh unto the Source of good things as is meet, whence thou didst richly receive the fruit of divine gladness and undying glory.

Neither the yoke of slavery, nor womanly weakness, nor hunger, nor stripes prevented thee from emulating the steadfastness of the martyrs, O most glorious one; for thou didst endure torments with fervor of soul. Hence thou hast received a heavenly mansion, and hast been adorned with a crown of graces, standing before thy Creator.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone and melody—

Deliver my lowly soul from condemnation and grievous transgressions, O all-holy Bride of God; and by thy supplications set me free from death. And grant that on the day of testing I may receive that justification which the assemblies of the saints have received. Before the end show me forth as cleansed by repentance and outpourings of tears.

Or this stavrotheotokion—

When she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, the Ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, marvelled and cried aloud: “What is this that I see, O my Son most desired: wherewith the unbelieving and iniquitous assembly hath recompensed Thee, which enjoyed Thy many wonders? But glory to Thine ineffable condescension, O Master!”

AT MATINS:

Canon to the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divine glory of Matrona,” the composition of Theophanes the Branded, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

O thou who hast now joined chorus with the divine ranks of the incorporeal ones before God the Cause of all, and who manifestly delightest in the splendor of the Godhead: Enlighten those who hymn thee.

Christ God Who deigned to assume the guise of a servant, wishing to free man from corruption and the bonds of death and the yoke of slavery, O martyr, betrothed thee as His bride.

Having made her feminine nature manly through grace, in the weakness of her body, yet strengthened by divine might, she humbled the haughty gaze of him who of old boasted beyond measure that he would obliterate the sea.

*Theotokion:* The portal of Thy descent to us, O Lord, supernaturally shone Thee forth Who art mystically called the Orient, the Sun, the Light, the One Who loveth mankind, Who art of two natures.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

With steadfastness of mind thou didst endure the cruel and grievous torment of the most iniquitous woman, O glorious and most blessed Matrona.

Feeling the pains of thy stripes, thou didst nonetheless steadfastly endure them; and by groping in the darkness thou didst receive divine radiance.

The streams of thy blood quenched the pyre of ungodliness, and they have given the faithful to drink of the waters of piety.

*Theotokion:* With godly voice we praise thee, O all-pure one, who, as the table and the ark, received in thy womb the Word of God Who is without beginning.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning....”—

Having piously enslaved thyself to the Almighty, O honored Matrona, thou wast held in thrall by the ungodliness of thy mistress; but thou didst steadfastly endure dark imprisonment and the sting of scourgings, and didst pass over to God, O divinely wise martyr. Pray thou in behalf of those who keep thy memory.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O fervent and invincible intercessor, renowned and unashamed hope, rampart, shelter and haven for those who flee to thee, O pure Ever-virgin: With the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and great mercy unto the world.

Or this stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee suspended of Thine own will on the Cross between two thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, said: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like a malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Strengthened by divine power, O Matrona, thou didst flee the slavery of thy cruel mistress; for, laboring for thy Master alone, thou didst acquire a humble inclination of soul.

Bellowing and insane with drunkenness, enraged with wrath, with Hebraic cruelty thy most ungodly mistress flayed thy body, O passion-bearing martyr.

Imprisoned in dark places and tortured with hunger, O martyr, thou didst exhibit the endurance of youth and didst win thy reward, the banquet of immortality.

*Theotokion:* The golden candlestick prefigured thee who art truly the Mother of God, who bore the incarnate God Who enlighteneth all things with the splendor of divinity.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

O Bestower of life, the divinely wise one acquired Thee as a splendid crown of praise and went forth from darkness to divine effulgence.

Christ set thy feet on the rock of faith, O blessed one, and thou didst wisely direct thy steps to Him.

Possessed of a truly divine, wise mind which thought of God, O most blessed Matrona, thou shinest forth amongst the choir of martyrs.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, thou gavest birth unto the form of divinity and the form of humanity, the union unconfused through unconfused union.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Deified by unceasing prostrations, thou didst resolutely embrace the Desire of Eve, O passion-bearer Matrona, and hast been rightly vouchsafed everlasting glory. *Twice*

It is not slave or freeman who is judged in Christ, but nobility of virtue, O thou who art adorned with the inclinations of piety. And thou hast been shown to be a model thereof, O invincible passion-bearer.

*Theotokion:* We know thee to be the temple and chamber of God, the jar, candlestick and tablet who acquired within thee the inscription of the Word Who became incarnate in His loving-kindness, O all-immaculate one.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou didst truly cleave unto Thy heavenly Lover with love and boldness, O all-praised one, crying out in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of the glory, O Lord! *Twice*

Full of all manner of virtues, with gladness and joy didst thou pass over from earth to the choirs of heaven, O glorious Matrona, receiving immortality as an inheritance.

*Theotokion:* Resplendent and adorned with all the virtues as with varied colors, O Mother of God, thou gavest birth unto the Word of the Father in manner past recounting. Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Released from the flesh, thou wast vouchsafed to behold rays of abundant light, and to dwell in a tabernacle of heaven instead of the dark and gloomy place wherein thou hadst been incarcerated, O glorious one, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! *Twice*

Beautiful is the wreath wherewith thou hast now been crowned by the life-creating right hand of the Almighty, O glorious one; for, beholding thee, His bride, empurpled by the streams of thine own blood, He joyfully illumined thee. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast truly been shown to be the one who truly gave birth unto the God of truth, bearing the divine name for the faithful in like manner, O all-pure one. Wherefore, with divine wisdom we glorify thee as Theotokos, O all-immaculate Mistress.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Thy day is resplendent with noetic outpourings of light and the most radiant splendors of the three-Sunned Effulgence, O martyr. Thereon we now pray: Illumine those who hymn thee.

The reward for thy painful stripes didst thou find to be the inheritance of heaven, O glorious passion-bearer, among the assembly of the firstborn; holding festival therein, protect us by thy ­supplications.

Truly thou hast now united thyself unto Christ, thine immortal Bridegroom, having splendidly come to flower by His divine wounds, O most wise one, resplendent in the precious blood of martyrdom.

*Theotokion:* Loose now the fetters of my transgressions, O Virgin Theotokos who gavest birth unto the Wellspring of loving-kindness; and fill me with sweetness of soul, O thou who alone art blessed of God, that I may magnify thee as is meet.

