The 28th Day of the MONTH OF MARCH

Commemoration of Our Venerable Fathers

Hilarion the New & Stephen the Wonderworker

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable Hilarion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Having acquired a blameless life, patience and meekness, and love unfeigned, boundless abstinence, standing all-night, divine compunction, faith and true hope in compassion, O father, thou didst live on earth like an angel in the flesh, O blessed Hilarion, intercessor for our souls.

An earthly angel and a heavenly man wast thou, O venerable one, a wellspring of compunction, a stream of compassion, an abyss of miracles, a surety for sinners, a truly fruitful olive-tree of God, anointing with the oil of thy labors the faces of those who praise thee with faith, O wondrous Hilarion.

Illumined with divine understanding, thy mind transcended the passions of the body, and was elevated above earthly things, bearing the image of God and depicting divine beauty within itself. Through the activity of the Spirit, thou art recognized as wholly godly, O Hilarion our father, thou adornment of monastics.

And 3 stichera for the venerable Stephen, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

As a monk most true, a most radiant star and a wellspring of compunction, thou wast shown to be full of love, meek and serene, compassionate and humble, guileless and blameless, O father Stephen. Wherefore, Christ appointeth thee as a shepherd for the venerable, honored with miracles.

Thou wast possessed of all-night vigilance, O father, ineffable abstinence, undisturbed prayer, godly life, faith, hope and love, Orthodox wisdom, wondrous endurance, and the greatest compassion; and thou didst repose, shining forth before thine end in all-glorious signs. Wherefore, we honor thee, O venerable Stephen.

We praise thee, O Stephen, as a star of great brilliance, as a never-setting sun, as an animate heaven adorned with divine miracles as with stars, as a fragrant meadow and garden of sweetness, as a wellspring of sanctity, as a most great physician of the infirm, as our good pastor and intercessor.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

With the showers of the all-holy Spirit bedew my thoughts, O all-pure one, who gavest birth to Christ, the Drop Who by His compassions washeth away the iniquities of men which are infinitely past count; dry up the flux of my passions, and by thy supplications ever vouchsafe unto me a torrent of the food of life.

Or this stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

As she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, the Ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, marvelled and cried out: “What is this sight which I see, O my Son most desired? How hath the unbelieving and iniquitous assembly recompensed Thee, which enjoyed Thy many miracles? But glory, O Master, to Thine ineffable condescension!”

AT MATINS

The Canons

Ode I

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thy gladsome character, O father”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

As thou art compassionate and meek, chaste and truly glad of spirit, O father Hilarion, by thy mediation vouchsafe unto me divine compassion, that I may hymn thee now in the stillness of my heart.

Having purified thyself from childhood and taken up thy cross, O father, thou didst follow the Lord; and, adorned with dispassion, by temperance and constant prayer thou didst cause the passions to wither away.

Taking up the easy yoke of the Lord, obedient to His precepts, O venerable Hilarion, thou didst cast off the most onerous burden of sin, acquiring holiness, O most wise one.

*Theotokion:* Uproot the tares of my transgressions, O Mistress, praying to thy Son and God; and destroy the sin which tormenteth me, O Ever-virgin, that, saved, I may ever praise thee, O most immaculate one.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thy divine labors, O most blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Celebrating thy divine memory with faith, O divinely wise father Stephen, we ever glorify the Lord of all Who hath glorified thee with many miracles.

Deified at the bidding of God, thy mind turned utterly away from the passions of the flesh and showed thee to be an angel on earth, O most wise Stephen.

Thou didst endure the pangs of fasting, O father, and didst mortify the passions of the flesh, which are subdued only with difficulty; and thou didst manifestly clothe thyself in dispassion as with a garment.

Crucified by subduing thy members, O father, thou didst live for Christ Who by the Cross destroyed death and hath enriched thee with the abundant grace of healings.

*Theotokion:* At the ineffable word of the archangel, O all-pure one, thou didst conceive Him Who by His word sustaineth all the ends of the earth, and gavest birth to Him. Earnestly beseech Him to have mercy upon us.

Ode III

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Thy life shone forth with radiant deeds like the sun, O venerable one, and hath illumined the choirs of monastics and dispelled the darkness of the demons.

Thou wast glad of heart, humble of spirit and full of divine love, O venerable one, ever possessing a welcoming character.

With the drops of thy tears thou didst extinguish the burning coals of sin and even after thine end, as before it, O wise one, thou pourest forth an abyss of healings upon those who have recourse to thee.

*Theotokion:* Heal the wounds of my soul, O Mistress, and direct the movements of my mind to the will of the Word Who was incarnate of thee, I pray.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

Upon the assembly of the monastics thou didst shine forth like a most radiant star in honorable deeds and the corrections of the virtues; and thou hast illumined the whole world with beams of miracles.

By the power of the grace of the Spirit thou didst cast down the incorporeal foes, and wast right gloriously exalted by humble wisdom; and thou wast thyself a worker of miracles, O wise father.

With the word of truth thou didst shut the mouths of the heretics, O father; and, having endured persecution apart from thy wounds, thou hast received a divine crown, O wise one, as a most eminent martyr.

*Theotokion:* That man might become divine, God became man: He Who is without beginning received a beginning in time through thee, the only pure one. Wherefore, we, the faithful, call thee blessed, O Virgin.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Thou didst consecrate thy whole life to God, O most blessed and sacred one, as a truly most excellent performer of sacred Christian acts. Wherefore, rejoicing amid thy great feats and pangs, thou wast translated to the immaterial mansions and now pourest forth streams of healings upon us.

Glory…, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Shining forth like the radiant sun, thy memory, O father illumineth the hearts of the faithful, driving away the passions and dispelling the darkness. Protect us who celebrate it with pure faith, O father Stephen, and preserve us from the temptations of life.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and protection of the faithful: From tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver all who trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine supplications.

Or this stavrotheotokion—

Seeing Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, Thy most immaculate Mother cried out: “O my Son Who with the Father and the Spirit art equally without beginning, what is this Thine ineffable dispensation, whereby Thou hast saved the creation of Thine all-pure hands, O Compassionate One?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having cleansed thy heart, thou didst furnish thy mind with wings to soar aloft in honorable ascents, to behold the inconceivable beauty of the one God and to be illumined by the splendors thereof.

Recounting divine words, O father Hilarion, thou didst draw forth divine understanding therefrom, and didst transmit it unto all who piously had recourse unto thee.

With the sweetness of thy words calm thou the hearts of those who have recourse unto thee; for, laboring, thou didst teach them with right acceptable discourse and didst preserve love amid compassion, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* The Lord made thee the Lady and Mistress of all, O all-pure one; for He was incarnate of thy womb, delivering His creation from the dominion of the enemy.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a fruitful tree, O wise Stephen, having watered thyself with the drops of thy sacred tears, producing the fragrant fruits of the virtues; and thou pourest forth countless miracles. Wherefore, we piously honor thee.

The church which possesseth the shrine of thy relics is seen to be a divine garden of paradise, O wise Stephen, wherein bloom divers flowers of miracles, wherein the hearts of those who ever praise thee with faith do delight.

Unto the glory of Christ thou curest the blind and dost cause the cruel infirmities of men to cease; and hence, having been enriched by the grace of good works, thou hast been magnified, illumined and glorified, O our father, thou glory of monastics.

*Theotokion:* Sanctify me, O holy Theotokos who gavest birth in the flesh unto the All-holy One Who desired to become like unto men; and by thy supplications show us all to have a share in the life of heaven, O all-pure one.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Thou art a Mediator between God and man, O Christ God; for by Thee, O Master, are we led up out of the night of ignorance to Thy Father, the Source of light.

Out of thine own pangs thou didst weave for thyself a robe of salvation, O venerable one; for, clad therein, thou didst clothe the prince of darkness in everlasting shame.

Having caused the pleasures of the flesh to wither away through abstinence, O venerable father Hilarion, thou didst receive grace from heaven to cure all the infirmities of men.

With thy hands, which are unceasingly lifted up to God, thou hast delivered the pious from the hands of the deceiver, O father, and hast given health to all the ailing.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the might of the faithful and the dominion of the venerable; for through thee, O pure one, have beings from on high descended upon all, and those who dwell on earth ascend to the heavens.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, for we know none other than Thee. We call upon Thy name, for Thou art the God of the living and the dead.

As a phial full of the divine virtues, O wise one, after thy repose thou didst pour forth fragrant oil, causing the faithful people to marvel who venerate thee with love.

Thou didst shine forth in the great performing of awesome miracles, O most wise Stephen, before death, and after thy departure, O right wondrous one, and in thy sacred burial.

Having in a holy manner come to the end of thy life in Christ, O Stephen, our divinely wise father, thou hast made thine abode with the saints, and now dost sanctify those who honor thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one who gavest birth unto Emmanuel our God, Who manifestly became man in His loving-kindness: Beseech Him to have pity upon sinners, in that He loveth mankind, O pure one.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Having mortified thyself to this world, O Hilarion, after thy repose thou now dwellest in the mansions of heaven and ever pourest forth the life-bearing work of healing.

Thou wast rightly named, meek, guileless, blameless and venerable, easy to entreat and serene of spirit, O father who art most rich.

Adorned with boundless compassion and honored with the beauty of love for the poor, thou wast shown to be a chosen favorite of God, O most excellent Hilarion.

As thy life was honorable and blameless and thy character all-comely and beautiful, O most wondrous one, so are the miracles awesome which thou dost ever perform.

*Theotokion:* All of us, the generations of generations, bless the Theotokos as the divine, undefiled bridal-chamber of God, the fiery throne of the Almighty.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

O venerable father Stephen, in Christ thou dost set the lame aright and dost cause the blind to see, enablest the paralyzed to walk and drivest away evil spirits.

A stream of healing ever floweth from thy precious shrine in abundance, as from a pure spring, O blessed one, drying up every torrent of the passions.

O father Stephen, who wast shown to be a wondrous worker of miracles and a true pastor, ever preserve thy flock, which thou didst gather together with thy great effort.

*Theotokion:* Descending upon thee like dew upon a fleece, O Theotokos, the Savior hath manifestly dried up the torrents of ungodliness and ever giveth drink to the souls of those who honor thee.

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

With the sword of thine ascetic feats thou didst wound the incorporeal serpent and utterly destroy him. Wherefore, thou hast received the prize of miracles, O venerable one, to heal the most grievous sufferings of souls and bodies.

Thy discourse issueth forth like dew, O our venerable father, dispelling the burning heat of the despondency of those who with faith have recourse to thee, and ever illumining their character with thy virtues and spirit.

Having made thy mind the ruler over thy passions, thou didst manifestly reign as an excellent victor and didst vanquish alien nations, O wise one; and thou didst destroy the most pernicious passions of the demons.

The winds of temptations did not shake the tower of thine unmovable heart, O venerable one; for strengthened by the love of the Lord, thou wast established firmly upon the rock thereof, and hast become the divine confirmation of many, O father.

*Triadicon:* O transcendent Trinity, I hymn Thee, the indivisible, unconfused Unity of three Persons, incomprehensible in essence: the one God Almighty, O Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, the grace of the Spirit prefigured thee from afar in images and the proclamations of the prophets, who called thee the fertile and holy mountain, the portal of salvation, the scroll most new, and the tabernacle.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou didst perform the sacred mysteries, for with the burning coal of thine ascetic sojourn thou didst show thyself to be wholly the sweet fragrance of Christ, and dost ever perfume the faces of the faithful, working miracles past understanding.

Radiant with the brilliance of Orthodoxy, thou didst drive away the darkness of heresies, O wise one; and having endured persecution for many years, thou wast a martyr who did not shed his blood. Wherefore, we praise thee with faith.

Having acquired great patience, abstinence, faith and true love, thou wast shown to be a father of orphans, a compassionate and meek intercessor for widows, and the glory and boast of monks, O Stephen.

The horde of the evil-minded were amazed by thy standing all night, thine abiding in prayer, thy tears and sighing to the Creator of true love, O Stephen, whereby thou didst foil their machinations.

*Theotokion:* How is it that thou dost nourish with milk the Son thou didst bear without father, Who feedeth every creature, O pure Mother? How is it that thou bearest in thine arms Him Who upholdeth all things? Thy wonder passeth understanding! Wherefore, we ever hymn thy mighty works.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having abandoned the transitory glory of life and fleeting pleasure, O most wise father, in the heavens, with all who fear the Lord, thou didst receive glory which cannot be taken away and lasting sustenance.

Thou didst pass all thy life with downcast countenance; wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed the blessedness and consolation in which the saints share. And now, rejoicing, O venerable one, thou abidest in the land of the meek as one intelligent and wise.

Thy death was shown to be precious in the sight of the Lord, O most sacred father; for thou didst venerate His icon and endure persecutions, O venerable one, oppressed by tyrants and therein shown to be a martyr.

Thou didst manifestly cause the displeasure of the fishermen to cease, O father, and didst multiply their draught of fishes, which before they were unable to catch; for God hearkened unto thy prayers, O venerable and all-blessed sacred minister.

*Theotokion:* Wash away the defilement of my passions and the mire of my sins, O divinely joyous one, and open the portal of repentance unto me who have stumbled, am hindered mightily by transgressions, and anger God.

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him ­supremely for all ages!

Doing venerable works in holiness, O most blessed one, thou hast joined the venerable and all the elect. With them we honor thee, worshipping at the shrine of thy relics, O God-bearing father Stephen.

Having acquired purity of mind, O wise one, thou wast a beautiful mirror of the Spirit, receiving the manifestations thereof, and illumining the people with thy teachings.

Through thee, O most blessed and all-wise one, that which is all-glorious and perfect is seen; for at the mere sight of thee, a woman was loosed from the illness which afflicted her, and began to walk aright.

*Triadicon:* Let us hymn the unoriginate Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible First Cause, the eternal Rule, the Essence in three Hypostases, the one glory and sole kingship.

*Theotokion:* The Incorporeal One Who was divinely incarnate of thee, O all-pure one, do thou beseech, that He slay the passions of my flesh and enliven my soul, which hath been slain by my sins.

Ode IX

Canon of the Venerable Hilarion

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Pouring forth healings through the grace of the Spirit, thy tomb drieth up the showers of the passions, expelleth spirits of deception, and illumineth the hearts of all the faithful who bless thee with faith, O venerable Hilarion.

In the meadow of fasting thou didst blossom like a rose, like a sweet-smelling lily, like a fragrant apple; and thou hast perfumed the souls and hearts of all the pious, O glorious Hilarion, intercessor for those who praise thee.

Thou didst have compassion, love, humility and mercy, an appearance of simplicity, true faith and hope, an honorable life and upright character, O venerable Hilarion, adornment of monastics.

Thy memory hath shone forth today like the sun, truly illumining the hearts of the pious with the splendor of thy pangs and the effulgence of thy miracles, O father; and thereon be thou mindful of all who honor thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* Rejoicing, we offer thee the cry of Gabriel, saying: Rejoice, O place of sanctity! Rejoice, glory of the venerable and salvation of all the faithful, because of whom we have been deified, O Ever-virgin Theotokos!

Canon of the Venerable Stephen

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

Following the steps of those who lived piously and in holiness upon the earth, O God-bearing Stephen, thou didst show thyself to be meek, guileless, compassionate and humble, peaceful and full of the love of God; wherefore, we praise thee with faith.

Like sweet-smelling myrrh, like an all-pure lily, like a full-blown rose, O father, thou dost emit from thy precious shrine the fragrance of countless healings, dispelling the fœtid illnesses of those who fervently have recourse unto thee with faith.

We entreat thee, O divinely wise one, the godly shepherd and emulator of Christ, the Chief Shepherd. With thy holy mediations ever save us, who are of thy flock, from the wolves of evil.

Thy most holy memory, shining forth like a great sun, doth splendidly illumine creation; and celebrating it with piety, we cry out to thee, O Stephen: Having enlightened the thoughts of all with thy supplications, protect and preserve us.

*Theotokion:* Being sin-loving and careless of life, O pure one, I tremble before the inexorable judgment. By thy holy entreaties preserve me uncondemned thereat, O Bride of God, that I may ever bless thee as mine intercessor.

