Also on The 30th Day of the Month of March

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints Sophronius the Wonder-worker, Bishop of Irkutsk

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone VIII—

O holy hierarch father Sophronius, pure vessel of the Holy Spirit, rule of piety, adornment of the Church of the city of Irkutsk and confirmation of all Siberia, emulator of the apostles, boast of hierarchs: Entreat the Chief Shepherd, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O most sacred Sophronius, thou didst preserve the law of God intact, and, instructing thy people in piety, faith, love and loving-kindness, thou didst set a rule of life for monastics, thyself providing a model of virtue, and didst teach the fear of God to those of every rank and age, leading all to salvation and beseeching God, that He grant mercy unto each. *Twice*

Divine grace summoned thee to be the hierarch of the great city of Irkutsk and the land of Siberia, O blessed one, and to be a rule of faith and a model of meekness. Wherefore, O divinely wise one, thy life showed thee forth as most comely, an ally of hierarchs and a companion of the venerable and the righteous. And now, standing at the throne of the Holy Trinity, pray thou for the salvation of our souls. *Twice*

After thy repose, O holy hierarch Sophronius our father, thy relics were preserved for many years, pouring forth miracles upon those who call upon thee with faith; but when the time of thy glorification drew nigh, thy tomb was reduced to ashes by a fiery conflagration, and thy relics were consumed by the flames because of our sins and vile life, for we are unworthy to possess such a heavenly treasure: yet even after this thou hast dwelt among us, granting us peace and great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O glorious and sacred Church of Siberia, ye company of hierarchs and people of every rank, let us now join together, that we may glorify in splendor the memory of Sophronius, our pastor and teacher, joyfully crying out to him: Rejoice, O champion of the Trinity! Rejoice, adornment of the see of Irkutsk! Rejoice, new and excellent wonder-worker! For precious are the remains of thy holy relics which have never ceased to emit miracles, and which illumine and gladden thy chosen people, whom thou didst beget through the Gospel and hast made steadfast in Orthodoxy. And now thou prayest to the Lord for us, O holy one.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and this sticheron of the saint, in Tone I—

Following in the steps of Christ the Master, illumined with the light of the divine Spirit, thou wast shown to be an abode of purity and didst partake of divine visions. Wherefore, Christ hath shown thee to be an heir to the kingdom and a dweller with all the saints. Pray thou, O father, that we who keep thy memory with love may obtain this as well.

Glory…, in Tone VII—

Ineffable grief overtook the flock of Irkutsk when thy holy and precious relics and sacred shrine were consumed by a fiery conflagration in the night. Yet even thereafter thou wast shown to be an inexhaustible wellspring of miracles, O Sophronius, holy hierarch of Christ, thou bulwark of thy city, strengthening of soul for thy faithful children and confirmation of the holy Faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Beneath thy protection do all mortals flee, O Mistress, and we cry unto thee: O Theotokos our help, deliver us from our boundless transgressions, and save thou our souls!

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V—

Rejoice, ye people of the city of Irkutsk! For, lo! a new wonder-worker hath appeared, a physician and helper amid all sorrow, a healer, an expeller of demons, the defender of his city and subduer of passions, an ever-vigilant advocate before the Lord for all who flee to him in faith.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O sacred one, God-pleasing father Sophronius, thou foundation of right faith, fulfiller of every virtue, provider for the poor and consolation of the sorrowful, physician who exactest no fee from the infirm, mighty hope of all who call upon thee with ardent faith.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Rejoice, O Sophronius our joy, fellow sufferer with the sorrowful and advocate for them; for thou didst live on earth like an angel, adorned with innocence and righteousness, showing forth the radiant way which leadeth to God. And even after thy departure from us on earth thou dost not forsake us. We glorify thee, O God-pleasing father!

Glory…, in Tone III—

Glory to Thee, O Christ God, Thou boast of the apostles and joy of the martyrs, majesty of hierarchs and priests, spiritual delight of the venerable! Glory to Thee, O Christ our Savior, for Thou hast revealed to us a new and all-glorious wonder-worker!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Fill thou my heart with joy, O Virgin who didst receive from Gabriel tidings of joy; and, destroying now the grief of sin which is within me, fill my heart with love for the Lord.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed Sophronius; thou didst guide aright the communities of monastics; and, having been counted worthy of the rank of bishop, thou didst shepherd the flock of Irkutsk. Wherefore, even after thy repose thou hast received from God gifts of miracles. Entreat Christ God, that He deliver us from misfortunes and save our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the holy hierarch, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

The grace of the Spirit was poured forth in thy lips, O all-wise father Sophronius, and thou becamest a shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to love their neighbor as themselves, and God with all their heart and all their strength, and to be faithful to Him even unto death.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, who art more holy than the bodiless hosts of heaven and more honorable than all creation. Pray thou to the Lord, with the holy hierarch Sophronius and all the saints, that we be delivered from misfortunes and manifold evils, in that thou art good.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II—

Most wisely didst thou elude the pursuit of the most evil one, and didst cast him down utterly, in that thou wast the pillar and ground of Orthodoxy. Wherefore, assembling today, we honor thy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having thee as our hope and intercession, O Theotokos, we fear not the assaults of the enemy, for thou dost save our souls.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Sophronius, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are those who dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice.*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone III—

Thou didst live an angelic life on earth, O father, and standest now among the very ranks of the angels in heaven. Wherefore, blessing thee as a man of God, we joyfully celebrate thy memory, trusting that through thy supplications we will obtain from Christ God peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; and, glorifying thee, we chant: Rejoice, O all-holy Virgin!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 35, from the midpoint \[Jn.10: 1-8\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: “He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

A great wonder do we behold in the immolation of thy relics, O holy hierarch Sophronius our father: for the power of working miracles was not diminished in thee, neither was thy holy place made desolate; but like a ray of the sun thou illuminest the hearts of the faithful, teaching them to believe in the one Godhead, in the consubstantial Trinity.

Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Let us send up glory to Christ our God, Who is wondrous in His saints, glorifying the memory of His favored one this day.

Thee have we received as a second defender of our city. By thine intercession preserve us from all the evils which assail us.

Showing thyself forth to thy flock as a model of all good works, thou didst draw many souls to salvation; and they have obtained the delight of heavenly consolation, chanting: None is more holy than Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* The storm of temptations and the waves of tribulations beset us, O Mistress; but, going before us, grant us thy helping hand, thy fervent aid and intercession.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

As a most precious diamond thou didst shine forth unto the adornment of the Church of Russia, resplendent in the innocence of thy life, that we, the unworthy, may also delight in the light of Christ.

With the fervor of the Faith warm thou our hearts and rescue us from the darkness of sin, and root thou the spirit of piety and the fear of God within us who bless thy memory.

Steadfast in the love of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a river watering the land of Siberia with the teaching of thy discourses, O divinely blessed Sophronius; wherefore, we celebrate thy memory with love.

*Theotokion:* Now hast thou truly made wondrous upon us thy benefactions and mercies, O Mistress; wherefore, we glorify thy great loving-kindness.

Sessional hymn, in Tone V—

Truly blessed, yea thrice blessed, art thou, O hierarch Sophronius! Cleaving unto God with perfect love, thou didst love all men, laying down thy life for thy flock, doing good to the unfortunate, and watering souls with humility and submission to divine Providence; wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

An invincible rampart art thou for us Christians, O Virgin Theotokos; for, fleeing to thee, we remain unscathed, and though we sin again, we have thee as our advocate. Wherefore, giving thanks we cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, of Thy glorious dispensation, and I have glorified Thine unapproachable power, O Thou Who lovest ­mankind.

O hierarch of God, standing before the throne of the Lord of glory, entreat Him to grant peace unto our land, and that it may be delivered from all evils.

In thy good works thy light shone greatly before men, to whom thou didst show thyself to be a comforter amid sorrows and a gracious physician for the sick, that all the people of Irkutsk might glorify the heavenly Father Who hath given thee to us as a great wonder-worker.

Thou wast a temple of the all-holy Spirit, O father, containing within thyself divine wisdom for the edification of the Church of Christ and the confirmation of monastics.

*Theotokion:* All the earth is amazed, and all the nations marvel, beholding thine exceeding loving-kindness towards our land and the Christian race. O Mistress, transform thou our wickedness into piety through faith.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Gathering together this day, O ye people of the flock of Irkutsk, as many of us as have been baptized into Christ, let us clothe ourselves in spiritual joy, glorifying the memory of the holy hierarch.

As an emulator of the love of Christ, do thou quell all our hatred for our brethren, that, aided by thee in the love of the Gospel, we may reverently praise thee.

Thou wast shown to be undaunted in the work of the Lord, O Sophronius, subjecting thyself in all things to His holy will, in nowise looking to please men, but ever chanting: I know none other God than Thee!

*Theotokion:* With thy divine radiance heal thou the passions which ever assail us because of our negligence, O good one; for the holy Sophronius maketh supplication for this.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Again hath saving grace been made manifest unto the flock of Irkutsk in the glorification of thy memory, O blessed one; for we who honor thy memory have not been rewarded according to our sins, but have found in thee a fervent advocate.

We know thee to be a good shepherd tended with thy flock. Preserve now thy flock in the Faith and in oneness of mind, that we may abide in the bond of love and peace, and may be counted worthy of everlasting love.

Thou didst feed the hungry with the heavenly food of righteousness; for thy discourse was the bread of angels, O Sophronius, rescuing the souls of thy children from bondage to sin and leading them to Christ.

*Theotokion:* We are seized with trembling, O good one, for the pursuit of the evil one doth terrify us. But do thou, O Mistress, lead us up from the abyss of sin.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

O all ye faithful, with love let us praise our father, the holy hierarch Sophronius, the excellent adornment of the Church of Irkutsk, a hierarch named for chastity; for he is the guardian of this city and land, and the advocate of our souls.

*Ikos:* Wounded by the beauties of chastity, O holy hierarch, with unwavering resolve thou didst follow after Him Who created thee, didst disdain every carnal passion, and, like another sun, hast shone upon thy flock of Irkutsk: wherefore, Christ hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles. Be thou mindful of us who honor thine all-radiant memory, that we may cry unto thee: Rejoice, adornment of the hierarchal rank! Rejoice, spiritual ornament of the city of Irkutsk! Rejoice, ray of the noonday of the Russian land! Rejoice, thou who hast not diminished thy miracles since the immolation of thy relics! Rejoice, thou who wearest the crown of righteousness in the heavenly kingdom! Rejoice, O divinely wise Sophronius, thou advocate of our souls!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

We, the people of the city of Irkutsk, are filled with joy, assembling for thine honored glorification, that with one mouth and heart we may adore the consubstantial Trinity, Who hath glorified thee, and before Whom thou standest, O holy hierarch, praying for our souls.

O holy hierarch father Sophronius, as thou standest in the heavens forget not us below. Preserve us from every peril that assaileth us, and subdue all divisions and all contention, that, protected by thy supplications, we may pass the remaining time of our life untouched by grief.

The light of the threefold Sun rested upon thee, O holy hierarch Sophronius, and showed thee to be an all-radiant lamp for thy people, a healer and unmercenary physician for those who chant: Blessed art Thou, and supremely glorified!

*Theotokion:* O all-glorious Virgin Mother, extinguish the furnace of our passions with thy loving-kindness, that with thine elect we may hymn thee forever.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Desiring not to receive glory from men, as God permitted thou didst withdraw thy precious relics in a fiery conflagration, that thou mightest be glorified by Christ God alone, teaching us to desire not that which is earthly, but rather the kingdom of heaven, which we hope to obtain by thy supplications.

Like a ray of the light of Christ thou didst shine forth in the land of Siberia, O holy hierarch father Sophronius, enlightening all who tread the path of the Gospel, that, illumined by thy light, we may not wander onto the path of sin, but, having attained eternal light, may delight with thee in life everlasting.

Let us glorify Sophronius, the second apostle of Siberia; let us follow his blameless life and, thrusting aside all sinful remembrance of wrongs, let us cry: Rejoice, O Sophronius, thou help of our city!

*Theotokion:* Truly holy is this day, whereon the Mother of God hath assembled us to glorify her favored one, Sophronius, who resteth in her temple and by his miracles moveth us to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Thou didst keep the faith, thou didst finish thy race, and a crown hath been bestowed upon thee in the kingdom of Christ. Make us steadfast who are shaken by little faith, that we may not prove faithless, but believing, and that, gazing upon thine image, we may obtain salvation.

They who have called upon thee with faith have received great grace, O favored one of God; for thou hast shown thyself to be a comforter amid the sorrows of life, a helper amid its griefs, a healer of multifarious ailments, and a deliverer from all tribulations and evils. In thy miraculous aid forsake not us who honor thy memory with faith.

In thy mind thou didst strive for that which is eternal and incorrupt, and didst reject all earthly things. Help us to seek righteousness and the kingdom of God, O wondrous guide, that at the hour of our death we may be vouchsafed a Christian end, and may be counted worthy with thee to gaze face to face upon the Lord of glory.

*Theotokion:* Come ye, let us all praise the Queen of angels, the Sovereign of the hierarchal, priestly and monastic ranks, the protectress of the whole Christian race; and let us bow down before her: for in truth she hath promised to be our helper until the end of time.

Exapostilarion—

The light of Christ dwelt abundantly within thee, O all-wise Sophronius, that, having prepared thy soul with purity, He might make thee an heir to the kingdom of heaven and an advocate for our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O delight of the angels, joy of hierarchs and the venerable, intercessor for all Christians, Virgin Mother of the Lord: Help us and deliver us from everlasting torment!

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV—

Having nurtured thyself well with abstinence, thou didst ascend to the all-glorious summit of the virtues, adorned with hierarchal vesture and the splendor of thy life, shining with divine grace. With thy supplications illumine us who praise thee, O Sophronius.

O all-wise Sophronius, thou hast adorned the Church of Christ, and having increased the talant entrusted to thee, thou hast been vouchsafed to enter into the joy of thy Lord. And standing before Him with the angels, O holy one, pray thou for our souls.

As gold tried by the fire is shown to be pure, so were thy precious relics tried in the crypt, O father Sophronius, that they might shine forth all the more with the radiance of miracles, illumining souls darkened by the cloud of little faith, that they might glorify Christ our Savior and His great mercy.

When thine incorrupt relics were revealed to our generation, O blessed hierarch Sophronius, they were consumed in a fire through the malice of the enemy who desireth that thy glory be set at nought; but God hath glorified thee with multitudes of miracles, and hath made thee an advocate for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O father Sophronius, good and faithful servant of the Lord, diligent husbandman of the vineyard of Christ, having labored well in founding communities of monks, and given thy flock divine water to drink, thou didst grow seeds of piety among the people; and now, rejoicing and standing before God, pray thou with all the saints for the salvation of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the earth.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318

\[Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\]

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to Matthew, §11 \[5: 14-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

