The 31st Day of the MONTH OF MARCH

Commemoration of the Venerable

Hypatius the Wonderworker, Bishop of Gangra

\(for this day we provide also services in honor of St. Innocent of Moscow, and the Iveron Icon of the Mother of God\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O divinely wise Hypatius, trained well in asceticism, thou didst enter upon the all-glorious heights of the virtues, manifestly yearning for divine vision, contemplating the beauty of Christ. And having illumined thy mind and thought with His radiance, thou hast surrounded all with rays of miracles.

O Hypatius, father of fathers, shining with the light of Orthodoxy thou hast illumined the thoughts of those who have recourse to thee with faith; and blinding the eyes of Arius, thou didst drive him from the Church of Christ, O venerable one. Wherefore, having acquired thee as a beacon, we all honor and bless thy sacred memory.

O sacred father Hypatius, having in thy heart Christ the King, Whom thou didst preach as consubstantial with the Father, thou didst shine forth with wondrous beams, casting light upon the whole world. Thou didst slay the serpent, and by thy supplications didst pour forth a torrent of warm waters for the healing of sufferings.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

I beseech thee, the vessel of virginity and habitation of God, pure, beauteous and most precious: Calm thou my soul, which hath been affected by the venom of the serpent and is done to death by my transgressions, that I may glorify thee who hast magnified all the faithful, O divinely joyous one.

Or this stavrotheotokion—

“What is this sight which I behold with my eyes, O Master? Thou Who upholdest all creation art suspended upon the Tree; and, dying, Thou grantest life unto all!” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she saw lifted up upon the Cross the God and man Who had shone forth ineffably from her.

AT MATINS

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “The glorious Hypatius do I crown with hymns”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Rejoicing, with hymns let us all praise aloud the divine athlete, the wise hierarch, the wellspring of miracles, the good shepherd, the confirmation of the Church, the universal beacon.

The divine river which flooded thy pure soul, O all-blessed one, hath poured forth upon us the all-pure waters of many miracles, drying up the turbid streams of the passions, O most wise Hypatius.

Having mortified the pleasures of the flesh with asceticism, O Hypatius, thou didst have the true life of Christ, Who died for our sake, living within thy soul and directing all thy steps toward Him.

Thou didst make thy heart and soul an undefiled temple of the Trinity, O venerable hieromartyr, and, as a saving guide for thy flock, didst build sacred churches unto the praise of the Lord.

*Theotokion:* O pure and all-holy one, with thine own blood thou gavest flesh to God the Savior Who hath shown us His wise hierarch, the wondrous Hypatius, as a saving and fervent helper.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

With all thy heart thou didst repair to the wellspring of good things, and thence thou didst shine forth radiantly with divine effulgence most rich, O sacred father.

Protected by the laws of God, O father, with divine power thou didst destroy the synagogue of iniquitous heresies, saving thy flock, O father Hypatius.

Illumined by the all-radiant and exalted lamp of the Spirit, O wise one, lamps shining forth from the water at night revealed thee to those who passed by.

Augmenting the blessed choir of the divine fathers which Christ assembled, thou wast a member of the First Council, O blessed one, strangling Arius the most insane.

*Theotokion:* Deliver me from every attack of the serpent adversary, O pure Virgin Mother, and illumine the heart of me who glorify thee, the most immaculate one, with faith.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

Thou didst shine forth in the world, O holy hierarch Hypatius, illumining with miracles those who have recourse to thee with faith; and having suffered even to the shedding of thy blood, O wise one, thou didst unite thyself even more to Christ, and joinest chorus with the angels in the heavens, praying for us. Glory to God Who strengthened thee! Glory to Him Who crowned thee! Glory to Him Who, through thee, worketh healings for all!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Stretching forth thy divine hands, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator Who became incarnate in His goodness, O all-holy Virgin, entreat Him, that He deliver from temptations, sufferings and misfortunes us who praise thee with love and cry out: Glory to Him Who dwelt within thee! Glory to Him Who issued forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath delivered us by thy birthgiving!

Or this stavrotheotokion—

When Thou wast crucified on the Cross by the iniquitous, O Savior, and the soldiers pierced Thy side with a spear, the all-pure one lamented bitterly and stood in awe of Thy great and dread patience, crying out: Glory to Thy love for men! Glory to Thy goodness! Glory to Thee Who by Thy death hast given men immortality!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Preserving the true word and genuine teaching, thou didst preach the Word Who with the Father is equally eternal, O right wondrous hieromartyr and wonderworker, vanquishing the falsehood of the thoughts of Arius.

Having acquired in thy heart the living water which floweth unto eternal life, O father, by thy sign alone thou didst show the most bitter waters which flowed out of the mountains to be salubrious.

Having served venerably as a priest and suffered lawfully, thou didst show forth a more splendid priesthood in the blood which thou didst shed for love of Him Who poured forth His precious blood for the deliverance of mankind.

In that grace did not delay to descend upon thee, working miracles thou didst give over to cruel demons those who bitterly slew thee in ungodly manner, O most blessed and sacred martyr of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Streams of thy gifts, wellsprings of healings and bestowals of divine riches were given thee by the life-giving hand of the Almighty Who was born of thy womb, O Bride of God.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The understanding of thy grace passeth comprehension, and no tongue can describe the measureless depths of thy wonders, O martyr, hierarch and pastor, adornment of the people of Gangra, and beacon for the whole world.

Thou didst slay the serpent, dispatching it into the fire; and didst show forth the divine grace which richly abode within thee and glorified thee before rulers and all the people, O most sacred one.

The emperor had thine icon made as the seal and heirloom of his treasury, honoring thee thereby and proclaiming openly that the veneration accorded it passeth to the Prototype, O Hypatius.

Having struggled greatly, thou wast greatly glorified, working wonders in sacred manner: driving away illnesses, dispelling demons and repelling their assaults, and vanquishing the pernicious malevolence of heresies.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom of God, Who hath shown forth the most wise saints, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos; wherefore, the arrogance of the malice of the magus and his cruel machinations were set at nought.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thou didst ascend to the summit of the virtues, O Hypatius; thou didst draw nigh to the most pure wellspring of divine gifts, O blessed one, and hast poured forth an abyss of miracles.

The stones cast at thee were thy crown, O father, and the steps of thy stairway leading to the heights of heaven; and having ascended thereby, thou hast most manifestly united thyself to God.

Thy shrine ever poureth forth healing, O father, and the blessing received through thy precious finger truly scattereth evil like dust.

Having contended lawfully, thou didst gain honor as a martyr, and at an age far advanced thou didst pass over, rejoicing, to thy fathers, and, as is meet, hast received from Christ a crown for thy labors.

*Theotokion:* O wonder greater than all wonders! Without knowing man, the Virgin conceived in her womb Him Who holdeth all things, yet did not circumscribe Him.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

The mouth of the slithering serpent in nowise opened against thee, rather he dutifully crept into the fire, submitting to thy dread command, O ever-memorable one, who criest out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Mingling with thy tears the blood thou didst shed, thou didst make a single drink of both, O wise and right wondrous one, for thee who art mindful of the torrent of nourishment forever, O boast of martyrs.

Entering upon the meadow of thine honorable pangs, O blessed Hypatius, we perfume thy soul, knowing thee to be the sweet fragrance of Christ; and we cry out: O all-hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O pure one who knewest not wedlock, O Bride of God Who without seed conceived Him Who is consubstantial with the Father and gavest birth to Him through thy holy blood: Cease not to pray now, that He save us all.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy voice, suffused with light, O most wise one, hath dispelled the darkness of heresies with the divine splendors of radiance, and hath guided to the light of Orthodoxy those who cry: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like a pen, thy most beautiful tongue, O most wise Hypatius, hath recorded by grace the law, erasing all the ancient images on the tablets. Wherefore, we hymn thee as a wise scribe for all ages.

Let the wondrous Hypatius be honored as a divine pillar of fire reaching up to the heights of heaven, an unassailable buttress, an indestructible rampart, the confirmation of the Church, the foundation of hierarchs, the comely beauty of martyrs.

Thou wast counted worthy to behold Him Whom thou didst desire when manifestations of the truth were revealed; for, still shedding thine ardent blood, O martyr, thou didst hasten to thine ultimate Desire, joining chorus with divine choirs of the martyrs and the venerable for all ages.

*Theotokion:* O pure Mistress and Theotokos, direct me now, who am stuck fast by many tribulations and am beset in a tumult of sin, to the calm concourse of the stillness of the Spirit; for thou art the refuge of Christians. Wherefore, we hymn thee for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Like a rose, like a sacred lily of sweet fragrance, like a cypress-tree, like a divine and sweet-smelling oil, thy shrine, O holy hierarch, most honored hieromartyr, doth emit the perfume of miracles, dispelling fœtid infirmities.

Thou hast been shown to be a conversor with the prophets and the sacred martyrs who ended their lives well with the shedding of their blood, the peer of the holy and the venerable, and the companion of all the righteous from ages past, O right wondrous one.

Thy memory hath shone forth upon us today more brightly than the sun, illumining with immaterial light the hearts of us who with faith bless thee thereon and praise thee with supplication, O Hypatius.

With thy light, O Hypatius, illumine the thoughts of us who celebrate thy divine and luminous memory, and by thine entreaties deliver from fire, torment and every temptation those who piously bless thee.

*Theotokion:* Lift up thy grace, O pure one, increase thine entreaty, and bring before the Master the ranks of the angels, the choirs of the apostles and prophets, and all the righteous and the martyrs, that those who honor thee may be saved.

