The 2nd Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints,

Juvenal, Patriarch of Jerusalem

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Deposition of the Robe of the Theotokos\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I —

With hymns let us honor the most lauded Juvenal, who was young in soul, but mature in understanding, a pastor and teacher, the impregnable rampart of Orthodoxy, the all-radiant star of the Church, the father and patriarch of the mother of the Churches.

Thou didst proclaim unto the world the three-Sunned light of Orthodoxy, didst thunder greatly against the heretics, and didst suffer for the sake of the Truth, O divinely wise Juvenal; wherefore, we praise thee as is meet.

Having honed the sword of the Word of God to sharpness, thou didst put to shame the impiety of Nestorius, didst denounce the false teaching of Eusebius, and didst make clear the dogmas of Orthodoxy, O most sacred father Juvenal; wherefore, make us steadfast in the apostolic Faith.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

When the winds of contrary doctrines blew and storms of heresies rose up against the Church, thou wast like an unshakable pillar, O wondrous Juvenal; for, rejecting the false teaching of Eutyches, thou didst confess Christ to be the true God-man, and putting the impiety of Nestorius to shame, thou didst declare unto the world that the Ever-virgin Mary is the true Theotokos. Wherefore, instructed by thee, we cry out unceasingly unto God: Through the Theotokos, have mercy upon us!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

Of old, when the unblemished ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried aloud: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that the ungrateful assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemneth Thee, the Life of all, to death? Yet do I hymn, O Word, Thine ineffable condescension!”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VIII —

O successor to the apostle and brother of the Lord, thou didst shepherd well his flock, O Juvenal, holy hierarch of Christ; and having armed thyself against the heretics, the cruel wolves, with the divine fathers, thou didst set at nought their convoluted reasoning, and didst proclaim the Truth to the whole world, showing thyself to be a new Athanasius in discourse and writing. Wherefore, having been deprived like him of thy hierarchal see, rejoicing, thou didst accept disgrace for Christ’s sake, and didst cry out to Him: “O Christ, Thou King of all, shine forth Thy Truth upon men, burning up the thoughts of the impious with the Spirit of Thy mouth!”

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, O Jesus, Thy Virgin Mother cried aloud, O Master: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost unjustly endure wounding, O Physician Who hast healed man’s affliction and delivered all from corruption in Thy loving-kindness?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility and riches through poverty. O father Juvenal, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the wondrous champion of Orthodoxy”, the composition of Valeria, in Tone II —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Come, glorify your patriarch and father, O children of the city of God, and with us chant hymns of beauty divine now, celebrating his annual commemoration!

Afire with apostolic zeal, thou didst thunder forth against the heretics in thy discourse, O Juvenal, as a fellow initiate of the mysteries and a converser with the God-bearing fathers, who confessed the Son of God in Orthodox manner.

As heir to the apostle and brother of the Lord, thou didst shepherd his flock well, O holy hierarch; and, receiving the blessedness of those who are persecuted for the Truth, thou hast proclaimed the dogmas of Orthodoxy to all the world.

*Theotokion:* Today, in Blachernae, a precious treasure is enshrined — thy robe, O all-pure Mother of God, wherewith do thou mercifully overshadow and protect us, preserving us from all misfortunes and perils.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

O glorious Juvenal, thou companion of the God-bearing fathers, denouncer of the false wisdom of the heretics, golden trumpet proclaiming the Truth unto the world: establish us in the Orthodox Faith.

O sacred head of Sion, the mother of Churches, opposing the impiety of Nestorius thou didst cry out to the Theotokos: “O Virgin, stop thou the mouths of the ungodly, for there is none besides thee who hath contained God!”

The artfully contrived reasoning of false understanding didst thou reject, O holy hierarch, and thou didst explain the divine Truth both to the all-wise and to children, who chant together: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* O righteous Anna, join chorus now with us, for thou gavest birth to her who is more glorious than the seraphim and more spacious than the heavens, whose sacred robe we reverently kiss today, which is more precious than the purple vesture of kings, inwoven with gold, and is the protection and bulwark of the Christian people.

Sessional hymn, in Tone V —

O Juvenal, thou sacred intercessor for the earthly Jerusalem, blessed dweller in the heavenly Jerusalem, who sharest in the life which waxeth not old: instruct thou the young and the old, that they may preserve unadulterated the dogmas of Orthodoxy, may stand, even unto death, for the Faith of their fathers, and may piously honor and call the Ever-virgin Mary the Theotokos. To her do thou now pray in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and unashamed hope, rampart, protection and refuge of those who have recourse unto thee: with the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and great mercy to the world.

Stavrotheotokion —

Beholding Thee hanging of Thine own will upon the Cross between the thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother said maternally, her womb rent with pain: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed as a malefactor to the Cross, desiring to bring life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

In the city of David thou didst make thy flock steadfast in the apostolic Faith, in Ephesus thou didst denounce the teachings of the heretics, and in Chalcedon thou didst, like thunder, proclaim the truth to the whole world, O holy hierarch Juvenal. Wherefore, thou dost now minister to the Truth Himself in heaven.

O most sacred hierarch Juvenal, contending for the Truth thou didst suffer manfully, and thou didst receive the blessedness of those who are persecuted for Christ; and, deprived for a time of thy hierarchical throne, thou hast taken thy seat on a throne of incorruption in the Jerusalem on high.

Openly didst thou proclaim the Truth, and didst preach the dogmas of Orthodoxy from the rooftops, O father Juvenal; and fasting and making supplication day and night, thou didst cry out in the inner chamber of thy soul: “Glory to Thy power, O Lord!”

*Theotokion:* We now enshrine thy robe in a church of the Imperial City, and we celebrate with splendor, O Mistress. On thee alone do we set our hope of salvation, for thou hast set the Christian race as a seal upon thine all-merciful heart, stretching forth thine all-pure hands unceasingly to thy Son. To Him do we cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

O holy hierarch, thou didst preach to the world Christ the Savior, God the Word Who was begotten by God, and came forth, a perfect Man, from the divine Maiden Mary. Wherefore, through thee do we cry out to Him: We know none other God and God-man than Thee!

The divinely wise Juvenal commandeth us to call the Ever-virgin Mary the true Theotokos; and with him we cry out unceasingly: We know none other Mother of the Most High than thee!

“Keep the eye of thine understanding pure and the Faith unadulterated, O brethren, in nowise allowing yourselves to be buffeted by the winds of adverse teachings, lest darkness be found within you instead of light,” the great Patriarch Juvenal commandeth.

*Theotokion:* Grant unto us a robe of salvation, and array us in the vesture of gladness, O Theotokos, for we zealously honor the deposition of thy robe, and fall down before thee, crying out: We know none other fervent helper than thee, O Virgin!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Taught by thee, O wise Juvenal, in Orthodox manner we confess there to be two natures in Christ the Lord — unconfused, immutable, indivisible and inseparable.

Thy voice which issued forth from Ephesus like thunder proclaimeth to the whole world, in Orthodox manner: “Understand that the pure Theotokos gave birth to Christ without corruption, and be ye saved through her intercession!”

Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder, thou didst follow after Christ the Master, enduring persecutions and tribulations for His sake; and by thy supplications, O good shepherd, lead us, who lack endurance and are inclined toward vanity, up from the abyss of sins.

*Theotokion:* The insatiable maw of hell already gapeth wide to swallow us who are besotted with sin; but do thou, O most hymned Theotokos, stretch forth thy robe over it and, closing off the entrance to the abyss, grant us time to repent.

Kontakion, in Tone II —

Assembling now, with hymns let us honor Juvenal, the boast of Jerusalem, the namesake of youth, who today hath been translated to the life which waxeth not old, the heir of the apostles, fellow initiate of the mysteries with the God-bearing fathers, explainer of the dogmas of Orthodoxy, denouncer of false doctrines, the universal teacher of the Truth.

*Ikos:* Thou didst not emulate Pilate, who asked: “What is truth?”, O holy hierarch Juvenal; rather, thou didst clearly proclaim to the whole world that Christ, the God-man, is Truth and Life, and didst command all to honor His all-pure Mother as the true Theotokos. Wherefore, having assembled today, with hymns we honor thee as the opponent of false teachings and the champion of the Truth.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

With thee, O Juvenal, we honor two natures in Christ the Savior, Who is immutably God and perfect man, crying out unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O Juvenal, faithful servant of the Lord, thou commandest that we honor the Ever-virgin Mary as the true Theotokos; wherefore, adorned by her and joining chorus, we chant: Blessed art Thou, O all-pure Mistress!

Thou didst fight fearlessly for the Truth, O most blessed father, thou true mouth of Chalcedon and radiant voice of Ephesus, rejoicing in the three-Sunned light of Orthodoxy, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Thine incorrupt body, which had contained God, O Virgin, didst thou cover with thy robe. Thereby do thou defend us who cry out to thee with love: All-blessed art Thou, O Theotokos Mary!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In the heavenly Sion thou standest now in glory with many others before the Lamb of God, having the name of the heavenly Father written upon thy forehead, O hierarch of God, chanting a new hymn before His throne and rejoicing forever.

Thou wast a venerator and faithful custodian of the sepulcher of the Lord, O holy hierarch father Juvenal, and in the church of Gethsemane thou didst unceasingly send up prayers to the Theotokos in behalf of all the world, and didst emulate her glory in thy life.

*Triadicon:* By thy word and life thou didst command all to confess the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, O most blessed one; wherefore, standing now before the life-creating Trinity, thou dost glorify God forever.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, as the apple of our eye do we cherish thy robe, wherewith thou didst cover thine all-pure body which contained God, and we enshrine it now with honor in the church, crying: Protect us therewith from misfortunes and perils, forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Thou didst do battle steadfastly for the Faith, O Juvenal, and the peace of God which surpasseth all understanding thou didst preserve in thy heart; and now thou hast been crowned by the hand of the Almighty. Wherefore we all earnestly magnify thee.

Thou didst tend the lambs and sheep of the flock of Christ exceeding well, and didst wound the cruel wolves with the sword of thy discourses, O beacon of Orthodoxy and truly good shepherd; wherefore, the whole world honoreth thee.

We who celebrate thy memory with love, O holy hierarch of Christ, ask thine aid before the throne of the King of glory; we learn righteousness in thy discourses, and magnify thee as the friend of God.

*Theotokion:* The Theotokos and Mother of the Unoriginate One, whom thou wast zealous to glorify as is meet, O Juvenal, do thou unceasingly entreat in behalf of those who honor thy memory with faith, that we may fervently magnify thine intercession.

Exapostilarion —

O pastor of the city of God, with the pipes of thy discourse and writings call thou thy sheep together, that, following after thee, they may attain unto the fold of the Lord.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Come, ye faithful, and with the most sacred Juvenal let us honor the Mother of God as the Theotokos, for her most precious robe is enshrined today in Blachernae and within the hearts of those who piously set their hope of salvation on her sure intercession.

