Also on THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE DEPOSITION OF THE PRECIOUS ROBE OF OUR ALL-HOLY LADY, THE THEOTOKOS,

IN THE CHURCH OF BLACHERNAE.

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign...” —

In that Thou art compassionate, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Thou hast given Thy Mother unto Thy servants as an aid, and through her Thou hast wrought Thine ineffable and awesome dispensation and hast restored our pristine and divine estate. Wherefore, honoring her most-honored festival, we hymn Thy might, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls. *Twice*

O all-hymned one, with thy precious robe dost thou ever protect the city which doth honor and glorify thee, as is meet, from godless barbarians, famine and earthquake and civil strife, O pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock. Wherefore, it glorifieth thee, O all-holy Bride of God. *Twice*

O Mistress, full of divine grace, thy precious robe hast thou given to thy city as a treasure which cannot be taken away, protection and glory, an impregnable rampart, a treasury of healings, an ever-flowing fount of miracles and an ever-saving haven for the tempest-tossed. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O all-hymned and pure one.

Ye people, draw forth healing of soul and body, for before all lieth the shrine wherein the precious robe of the Ever-virgin hath been placed, which poureth forth upon us streams of wonders, washeth away the darkness of our hearts and the defilement of the passions, and sanctifieth the souls of the faithful with grace divine.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone II —

Having cleansed mind and thought, let us celebrate with the angels, radiantly beginning the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of Christ our God, the King of all, saying: “Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness!” For, having adorned her like unto a comely palace, Thou didst appoint her to Thy city, O Master, to establish it and protect it by Thy mighty power from barbarian adversaries, through her supplications.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...” —

Thou alone didst become the animate palace of God, and thy precious robe, preserved in thine holy abode, hast thou given to the faithful as sanctification and an unassailable rampart. By it is thy city saved, O Mother of God, hymning thy divine might.

*Stichos:* Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.

Thy precious robe which covered thine honored and holy body, O pure one, hast thou given to all as a vesture of glory and a wellspring pouring forth the gracious waters of immortality. And we celebrate its deposition, honoring thee, O Theotokos, who art the most honored of all of God’s creations.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Thy temple, O Mistress, which holdeth thy sacred robe as a treasure of sanctity, doth ever sanctify all who have recourse to it with faith, and that therein, as is meet, do ever bless thee, the hope, steadfast protection and might of our souls.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone II —

The Church of God, covered by thy precious robe as with a most splendid crown, O all-pure Theotokos, doth today adorn itself, rejoicing, and doth mystically hold chorus, crying out to thee, O Mistress: Rejoice, precious diadem and crown of divine glory! Rejoice, thou sole perfection of glory and eternal gladness! Rejoice, haven and deliverance of those who have recourse unto thee, and our salvation!

Troparion, in Tone VIII —

O Ever-virgin Theotokos, protection of mankind: thou hast given to thy city a mighty legacy, the robe and cincture of thy most honored body, which have remained incorrupt through thy seedless birthgiving. For in thee are nature and time renewed. Wherefore, we beseech thee to grant peace to thy city and great mercy to our souls.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion to the Theotokos, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity...” —

Having given birth to the most comely Word in the beauty of thy virginity, thou didst wrap Him as an infant in thy robe, O pure one. This robe hast thou given to thy servants, O Mistress, as a protection, aid and source of sanctification. And we all faithfully celebrate its honorable deposition.

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity...” —

Thou alone didst have virginity and birthgiving free from corruption, O blessed one. And as a vesture of salvation hast thou given mankind thy holy robe, which even now doth remain incorrupt, O Bride of God. For its sake, O pure one, do we, thy servants, receive from God great mercy.

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode I

The first canon to the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the robe of the all-pure Virgin,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV —

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Thy precious robe hast thou given unto the people who ever honor thee, O Virgin Theotokos, as a sacred bulwark which ever overcometh every evil circumstance of the adversary by the power of the Spirit.

Thou didst hallow thy sacred robe by the touch of thy body and the touch of Him Who for our sake revealed Himself on earth in the flesh through thy pure blood. For its sake dost thou sanctify all thy servants who hymn thee, O Virgin.

A precious treasure hast thou bestowed upon all who faithfully honor thee, O good Virgin: thy truly honorable robe which doth enrich all with the gifts of the divine Spirit and the working of many miracles.

O ewe-lamb without blemish, who gavest birth unto the Lamb of God in manner transcending nature: thou hast given us thy precious robe, which truly doth ever wash away the spots and wrinkles from those who bow down before thee, O all-immaculate.

The second canon, also the composition of Joseph, in the same tone —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

The temple of the all-pure one, a radiant and inextinguishable lamp, having acquired her precious robe as a luminous heaven, doth today sanctify the whole world with rays of grace.

Thy city, having acquired thy divine robe, hath invincible might and strength and a bond of confirmation. Wherefore, it boasteth in thee, O all-pure one.

Truly thy most precious shrine hath appeared on earth as the ark of old, O Theotokos, bearing its signs, but keeping the faithful in true knowledge of God.

Katavasia: “I shall open my mouth...”

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Let us hymn the Mother of God, the beauteous adornment and portal of heaven, as well as her robe, which poureth forth divine gifts, which we lovingly venerate.

O pure one, with the garment of incorruption hast thou clothed, by thine incorrupt birthgiving, all who have been stripped naked by corruption. And to them thou hast given thy precious robe as a treasure which cannot be taken away.

Him Who clad all of Heaven in clouds didst thou wrap in thy robe, O all-pure one. And faithfully bowing down before it, we glorify thee, O protection of our souls.

This divine temple is for the afflicted a treatment which costeth nought, as a wellspring which unceasingly poureth forth healings, O all-immaculate one.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Ye faithful, let us honor today, as a bond of our union with God, the robe of the pure one, venerating it with faith.

Through grace doth the most precious robe of the pure one today pour forth healings upon us, the faithful.

Like the morning dew doth thine ever-flowing joy ever quench the furnace of the passions of those who hymn thee.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

Rivers of miracles, proceeding from thy most precious shrine as from Eden, water the face of the earth, pouring forth grace upon them who faithfully honor thee, O Theotokos. Wherefore, we hymn and faithfully praise thee, and ever thankfully cry out: Rejoice, O thou who art the only hope of them who hymn thee!

Glory...; Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Let us exalt her who alone is blessed, and let us touch her robe in faith, that we may draw forth the grace of the Spirit.

The city that honoreth thee, O Maiden, having acquired thy robe as a priceless treasure, doth venerate it in faith and receiveth grace.

O all-immaculate one, we honor thy robe, for it is a vesture of glory that poureth forth incorruption upon all who praise thee in hymns.

O all-immaculate one, who alone art blessed, who hast been shown to be more holy than the cherubim: from every evil circumstance save thou the souls of them who honor thee in faith.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having established thee as a most honored firmament, O Theotokos, the Creator and Fashioner hath adorned thee with shining rays as with stars, whereby thou dost adorn the ends of the earth.

From earth to heaven doth thy divine robe draw us who have been fervently enkindled with love therefor, O pure Theotokos. Wherefore, we glorify thee as the cause of Him Who is greater than all.

Behold, inexhaustible grace! Come, all ye who love the feasts of the Church, and with contrite heart draw ye forth the divine streams which pour forth abundantly from the precious shrine of the all-hymned one!

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

To us, thy servants, O pure Mistress, hast thou given thy robe and thy precious cincture as a divine foundation and a wall of defense.

O all-pure one, thou hast shown forth the temple which doth enshrine thy robe to be a beauteous paradise which emitteth the fragrance of the Spirit.

O all-holy one, sanctify the souls and bodies of us who with faith honor thy holy robe as most precious.

O Theotokos, show thou forth as temples of the God Who dwelt within thee us who bless thee with faith in thy divine temple.

Canon II

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

Thou hast magnified Thy Mother, O Lord; beyond compare hast Thou exalted her glory above all the noetic powers.

O all-pure Theotokos, thou art she who abundantly poureth forth the grace of God from thy holy shrine upon them who bow down before thee with love.

With thy power are faithful kings girded about. And thy city, having thee as a bond between it and heaven, is honored by thy robe.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

O thou who gavest birth unto the King and Lord of all, thou hast shown forth thy precious and holy robe as an indestructible rampart for the city which ruleth over all.

Rejoicing, let us glorify the grace of the Virgin, and let us honor her most holy robe, from whence proceedeth all health for the afflicted.

We know thee to be a wellspring pouring forth living waters, and we honor thy divine robe, from whence we, the faithful, do ever draw forth healing.

O Theotokos, the Lord Who was with thee, took upon Himself human nature; and all the evils of him who is alien to our race hath He driven away.

Canon II

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

The Lord hath wholly glorified thee in manner surpassing nature, adorning thee withal, O Maiden Theotokos; and with thy cincture, robe and their divine shrine hath He honored thee completely.

The faithful, having acquired thee as their strength and boast, are robed in glory through thy precious robe, O Theotokos, having obtained thee as an honored and most splendid adornment.

Of old all the prophets divinely strove to behold thine ineffable glory, O Theotokos; and in times past He Who transcendeth time revealed Himself to us through thee.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

O pure one, full of divine grace, thou hast given all the faithful a garment of incorruption, thy sacred robe, wherewith thou didst cover thy sacred body, O protection of all mankind. With love do we celebrate its deposition, and cry out to thee with fear, O pure one: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou boast of Christians!

*Ikos:* With faith let all of us who have been saved by her birthgiving bless Mary, the Theotokos, the pure vesture and tabernacle of the Word of God, the animate cloud and jar of manna; and let us touch the precious robe, wherewith holding the Master, she bore as a babe Him Who hath robed Himself in our flesh. Through Him was human nature caught up to the life and kingdom that are above all. Wherefore, we cry aloud with joy: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou boast of Christians!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

With an exalted mind and a contrite heart let us glorify the most exalted throne of the King, the all-holy and highly favored Maiden.

O chosen abode of God, thy robe which lieth in this thine honored abode do we honor as the holy ark and protection of the pious.

Every man is renewed who approacheth and kisseth the holy shrine containing thy splendid robe, O pure Virgin.

O pure Theotokos, save thou the city that honoreth thee from all famine, earthquake, affliction, foreign invasion and the malice of the adversary.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

O Good One, Thou alone, as the Sun of righteousness, hast divinely adorned with Thy divers gifts the temple of the pure one, wherein she emitteth brilliant rays from her robe.

Thy divine vessels truly pour forth the grace of miracles upon the faithful, O all-pure one, and from thy shrine noetic streams flow forth abundantly, as from another Eden, upon them who honor thee.

O all-immaculate Virgin, who dost clad thy precious body in a protecting mantle, thy shrine is cleansed of all spiritual defilement.

“Now draw ye all nigh with gladness! Come, ye who are on earth,” the shrine crieth mystically, “that ye may embrace the Lady’s most glorious robe which is laid up as a treasure within me!”

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

With thankful voices we hymn thee, the mediator of all that is good for us; and, kissing thy precious robe, O Maiden, we cry out: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having the sacred garment of the all-pure Virgin set as a noetic candle upon the candlestick of the altar, we ever illumine the eyes of our hearts.

In no wise hast thou left thine unworthy servants bereft of thy sacred touch, O Virgin; for in place of thy living body thou hast given thy robe unto all.

With hymns divine let us honor the spacious dwelling-place of God: her who is most pure among mothers, the portal of heaven whereby the gate that leadeth to death hath been shut.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The angels now join chorus in thine honored temple, O all-pure one, and surround thy precious and holy robe with joy and love, O pure Mistress. And we bow down with great gladness, hymning thee, the glory of our race.

O most pure one, thou art the most honored joy of all, the staff which budded forth the Flower of Life, the phial of the myrrh of the Spirit, the treasury of good things, the wellspring of fragrance, whence thy divine shrine doth pour forth the myrrh of healing.

The spiritual armies hymn thy mighty works, O pure and all-pure one; and all the patriarchs, prophets and apostles, and the choir of martyrs and the venerable openly proclaim the fullness thereof. And with them we also bow down before thee.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Lo! with hymns of joy we honor thee, the bed of Solomon; and surrounding thy precious robe as it were a second ark of holiness, we receive salvific healings, O Ever-Virgin.

Now, O Virgin, thy divine shrine, which containeth thy precious robe, is revealed as a source of light emitting rays of healing, dispelling the darkness of infirmities; and with love do we venerate it.

Today all the powers of heaven rejoice with us at the veneration of thy robe, as do all the apostles, prophets, martyrs, the righteous and the venerable, O Mistress who alone art ever virgin.

Thou hast bestowed thy robe as a radiant garment and a wall of defense upon the city that reigneth over all cities and honoreth thee as Queen of all creation, O Theotokos, Mother and Virgin.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

O Theotokos, thy shrine hath been shown to be a most honored chamber, for it containeth thy precious robe, thy virginal and bridal garment, and preserveth it as a treasury of life.

Having come today to the temple which portrayeth all the celestial adornment of the Virgin, O ye faithful, illumined with rays of wonders as by the stars, we are enlightened with splendor and grace.

O Theotokos, thy city hath thy cincture and thy precious robe as a rampart, the bond of unity of divine teachings, the boast of the Orthodox and the victorious hymnody of kings.

We hymn thine ineffable glory and thy boundless grace; for thou art the source of wisdom from whence the Word doth come unto all who honor thee and magnify thy birthgiving, O all-pure one.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “O Light immutable...” —

O ye mortals, come ye, let us with hymns honor today the robe of the divine Maiden, Mary the Theotokos, which sheltered Christ, that we may ever be blessed by the grace thereof.

Glory..., Now and Ever... —

Thou hast renewed nature and time, O Mother of God; for thy birthgiving was incorrupt, and incorrupt is thy robe, wherewith thou dost protect thy city and dost uphold the scepters of piety.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...” —

Every day the shrine which containeth thy robe is acknowledged as an ark of sanctification, a sacred wall of defense, the boast and glory of thy servants, O all-pure one. And having gathered together thereat in sacred manner, we hymn thy many mighty works and the abyss of thy wonders. *Twice*

Behold, a most glorious place! Behold, an ever-splendid abode wherein a treasure hath been laid up by grace: the precious robe of the divine Maiden. Draw nigh, ye people, and openly draw forth healing and enlightenment therefrom, and with thankful heart cry out: O all-holy Virgin, we who are saved by thy birthgiving do bless thee!

In gladness have we attained the feast of the deposition of thy robe, O Mistress; for today hast thou vouchsafed that thy sacred vesture be given to thy city, as an inviolate treasury, a precious gift, a wealth that cannot be taken away, a river of healing full of the gifts of the Spirit.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone II —

Having cleansed mind and thought, let us celebrate with the angels, radiantly beginning the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of Christ our God, the King of all, saying: “Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness!” For, having adorned her like unto a comely palace, Thou didst appoint her to Thy city, O Master, to establish it and protect it by Thy mighty power from barbarian adversaries, through her supplications.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Ode III of the Canon I of the Theotokos, and Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos —

My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.

*Stichos:* For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 320 \(Heb. 9:1-7\).

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII —

*Stichos:* Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.

*Stichos:* The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.

Gospel according to Luke, § 54

\(Luke 10:38-42\).

At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said: “Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.” And Jesus answered and said unto her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.”

Communion Verse —

I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

