The 4th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints Andrew the Jerusalemite, Archbishop of Crete

Commemoration of Our Venerable Mother Martha,

Mother of the Holy Symeon of the Wondrous Mountain

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Holy Royal Martyrs of Russia\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the holy hierarch, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

Hating the earthly authority of the body, with pure temperament and a simple heart thou didst cleave unto the Lord, O wise father, and wast shown to be a divinely inspired instrument of the Comforter, playing the psalmody of salvation for us.

Finding the Mother of the Lord to be the subject of great laudation, O Andrew, thou didst also hymn with mellifluous discourses the sacred apostles and the company of the blessed martyrs. With them be thou mindful of us who honor thee.

We know thee to be a pillar of Orthodoxy, a model of chastity, an example of meekness, and a godly hymnographer illumining the Church of Christ, O father Andrew, initiate of sacred mysteries. Wherefore, we celebrate thy festival.

And 3 for the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Sparing not thy flesh for the sake of God’s love, through fasting and tears thou didst set thyself apart for painful ascetic endeavor and courageous battle against the hordes of the enemy who hath crippled human nature. Wherefore, thou didst undertake godly struggles, casting down the mind of the adversary, O honored and all-glorious Martha. *Twice*

Thou didst spurn transitory things, didst avoid the love of what is corruptible, and didst desire the heavenly portion which is everlasting, meet for the righteous and incorrupt, and never-ending life, O pure one. Wherefore, celebrating thy radiant and splendid memory with faith, O glorious Martha, we honor thee with hymns divine.

Glory…, idiomelon, in the same tone —

Relieving ailments with the grace of the Spirit, thou drivest away evil spirits, healest sufferings and enlightenest the faithful with the radiance of thy miracles, O most glorious Martha. Wherefore, we hymn thy splendid, radiant and right wondrous memory today with unceasing hymnody.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion —

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Cross, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee maternally: “O my Son most desired, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How is it, O Word, that Thy hands and feet have been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, and Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VIII —

We honor thee, O Andrew our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; for through thee have we truly come to know how to walk thy path aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. Pray thou with them to the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

The unblemished heifer, beholding her bullock nailed to the Tree of His own will, cried out, lamenting piteously: “Woe is me, O most beloved Child! How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, desiring to leave me bereft of Thee, my Child, O most Beloved!”

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV —

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of piety. Wherefore, thou hast acquired exalted things through humility and riches through poverty. Entreat Christ God, O father Andrew, that our souls be saved.

Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII —

In thee, O mother, that which was created according to the image of God was manifestly saved: for, accepting thy cross, thou didst follow after Christ; and, praying, thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, for thou didst transcend it, and to care for the soul as a thing immortal. Wherefore, thy soul rejoiceth with the angels, O venerable Martha.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two canons for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Holy Hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “Let us weave manly hymns for Andrew”, in Tone V —

*Irmos:* Bringing battles to nought with His upraised arm, Christ hath overthrown horse and rider in the Red Sea, and hath saved Israel, who chanteth a hymn of victory.

Casting off sleep from thine eyelids, by virtue thou didst splendidly prepare thyself as a habitation and place of divine rest for the Master, O venerable one who hast been revealed by God.

Moving thy harp to play melodiously, thou didst adorn the Church of Christ with thy hymnody, O wondrous Andrew, instructed by the divine grace of the Holy Spirit.

Wisely submitting to the law written by God, with fasting thou didst mortify the bodily passions; and thou didst elevate thy mind with thy mighty desire, chanting hymns to God, O most wise one.

*Theotokion:* Thy Son and God is all desire, all-pure delight, the fulfillment of good things, O most immaculate one. Him do thou beseech, that He deliver those who now have recourse unto thee with faith.

Canon of the Venerable One, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto Christ, Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea, and led Israel over to dry land, for He hath been glorified forever.

Wounded with divine desire for eternal good things, thou didst despise corruptible glory and food. Wherefore, in godly manner thou didst live an angelic life, O venerable one.

Aflame with divine zeal and having lived a godly and manly life, thou gavest birth to a beacon and rampart for the faithful, a second Samuel, a comely offspring of the desert.

Thou hast been shown to be a scion of abstinence shining forth upon us a sun of great splendor, the great and all-wise healer Symeon, the intercessor and bulwark of the lands of the East.

*Theotokion:* We, the children of the earth, having become children of God through divine grace and thine ineffable birthgiving, hymn thee earnestly, the sole cause of our salvation.

Ode III

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Christ Who by Thy command fixed the earth upon naught and suspended its weight unsupported: establish Thou Thy Church upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, O Thou Who alone art good and lovest mankind.

Thou didst direct thy life with virtue, O venerable one, uniting thyself unto God by divine desire; and thou wast shown to be a reason-endowed instrument, brightening the whole world with hymns and drawing forth divine treasures.

Thou wast full of heavenly wisdom; for, opening the mouth of thy spirit, O venerable one, thou didst manifestly receive all the brilliant radiance of the effulgence of the threefold Sun, in that thou art a sacred minister.

Fortifying the powers of thy soul and restraining thy flesh by abstinence, O venerable one, thou didst wholly become an all-radiant star, adorning the Church with thine Orthodox teachings and tuneful hymnody.

*Theotokion:* Now do I beseech thee, O most immaculate Mother of God, to deliver me from the captivity of the passions and to cleanse all the wounds of my sins, for thou didst all-gloriously give birth to Him Who taketh away the sin of the world.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* None is as holy as the Lord, and none is as righteous as our God, Whom all creation doth hymn, singing: None is righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Offering the all-honored fruit of thy womb to the Master, O Martha, thou didst offer thyself as a perfect sacrifice on the fire of abstinence, chanting hymns unto Him.

To thine immortal Christ thou didst offer a right acceptable sacrifice, him who sprang forth from thy womb, O venerable God-bearer, thou confirmation, bulwark and rampart of the faithful.

Thou gavest wings to soul and body to soar aloft to the heights of heaven, and hast made thine abode with the wise virgins, and art a divine model for those who with faith have recourse unto God.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, establish thou the ascents of my soul upon the rock of my hope which remaineth ever immovable, that I may praise and glorify thee, mine only helper.

Kontakion of the venerable Martha, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “In prayers…” —

Standing in prayer before the Lord and the all-pure Virgin Theotokos, and offering up hymnody and praises, O honored Martha, thou gavest birth to a sacred child, the all-wondrous Symeon, a beacon for the whole world. With him do thou ever pray for us all.

Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

Thou wast a sacred minister adorning the crown of the Church with thy discourses as with precious stones, O all-wise Andrew. Wherefore, after manifold labors in this life, thou hast received glory and the kingdom which ageth not. Therein, O father, be thou mindful of those who commemorate thee.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in the same tone —

Keeping ceaseless vigil in prayer, pleasing God with almsgiving, going often to the divine churches, and praying with tears, faith and fasting, O all-praised Martha, thou didst receive a sacred child. With him pray thou, that we who honor thee with love be saved from misfortunes.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O most immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to the transcendent God: entreat Him unceasingly with the incorporeal ones, that, before the end, He grant remission of transgressions and amendment of life to us who with faith and love hymn thee as is meet, O thou who alone art most hymned.

Stavrotheotokion —

O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of Christ God, a sword pierced thine all-holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His own will. Him do thou entreat without ceasing, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving Thy divine condescension prophetically, O Christ, Habbakuk cried out to Thee with trembling: Thou art come for the salvation of Thy people, to save Thine anointed ones!

Openly proclaiming the glory of the all-hymned Trinity, thy discourse adorned by thy manner of life, O wondrous one, thou wast shown to be an excellent standard of theology.

O wise and divinely eloquent Andrew, showing forth an ascent of vision through spiritual activity, by thy manner of life thou wast like unto one embraced by vision.

Fighting like a shepherd, as a hierarch of God thou didst repel the attacks of lions from the Church, O Andrew, namesake of manliness.

Finding the Theotokos to be a great subject of laudation, thou didst show forth redoubled zeal, O wise one, honoring her who is above praise with multifarious praises.

*Theotokion:* Without physical union thou didst conceive within thy womb without corruption and gavest birth without pain; and, giving birth to God in the flesh, thou wast preserved a virgin even after parturition.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Word, with divine vision the prophet perceived Thee Who wast to become incarnate of the Theotokos alone, the mountain overshadowed; and with fear he glorified Thy power.

Having Christ ever in thy mind, thou didst spurn the love of things corruptible and desire; wherefore, glorifying Him, O Martha, thou hast been vouchsafed spiritual gifts.

Utterly quelling the threefold waves of the passions, O Martha, thou didst put down the assaults of wild beasts; and thou didst elude the tangled snares of the noetic Amalek.

Thou hast been a rampart and bulwark for the faithful who honor thee with pure love and keep thy holy memory, O blessed of God, thou helper of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be a noetic cloud, O Theotokos, bearing the very Sun of glory in the flesh, Who illumineth all creation with the light of divine grace.

Ode V

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Thou Who art clothed in light as with a garment: I rise at dawn unto Thee, and to Thee do I cry: enlighten Thou my gloom-enshrouded soul, O Christ, in that Thou alone art compassionate!

We who are now adorned with thy teachings and in sacred manner delight in thy divinely inspired hymns honor thy memory, O most blessed Andrew.

Manifestly illumined by the splendor of the Spirit, in an all-holy manner thou didst praise the choirs of the saints; and with them thou dost now rejoice, O most blessed Andrew.

Thou now beholdest divine things, not with the senses of a corruptible body, nor in illusions, but noetically, O all-wise one, uniting thyself to higher things by the actions of thy soul.

*Theotokion:* With tears I fall down before thee, praying intensely, that I may now be delivered from mine offenses, O most immaculate one, and be vouchsafed everlasting joy.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Beholding thine offspring uplifted toward heaven on a pillar by his divine activities, O Martha, thou didst hymn Christ Most High.

Thou didst manifestly receive an answer from heaven, O Martha, and according to the revelation of God thou didst conceive His great servant.

O venerable one, the city of Antioch setteth thine offspring forth as a fervent intercessor, a rampart and refuge for those who are in tribulation.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as a staff of power, we who place our trust in thee, O Bride of God, vanquish the hordes of the adversary.

Ode VI

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Christ Master, still Thou the sea of the passions which rageth with a soul-destroying tempest, and lead me up from corruption, in that Thou art compassionate.

With thy splendid mouth thou didst denounce the ungodly rhetors; for thou didst truly explain the veneration of the precious icons, O initiate of sacred mysteries.

In sacred manner thou didst adorn thy life, O glorious father; for thou didst quell the tumult of the passions and didst hasten to the life of dispassion.

All the faithful rejoice, piously delighting in the beauties of thy discourses and teachings, vanquishing the blasphemies of the heretics.

*Theotokion:* By His incarnation from thee, O all-immaculate Bride of God, He Who shone forth without beginning from the Father entereth into full fellowship with me.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Desiring the Queen of all with all thy soul, thou didst adorn thyself with purity, O Martha, and for her sake hast received spiritual gifts.

The angels marvelled at thy mature wisdom, O honored one, and men hymn the Creator of all Who hath glorified thee.

Thou didst adorn thyself like a beautiful and well-planted tree, and thou wast a clear mirror reflecting the manifestation of the Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Ever looking to thee as the calm in the midst of the tempest of passions and misfortunes, O Mistress, I hasten to the haven of salvation.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

Manifestly trumpeting forth hymns of divine sweetness, thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon for the world, shining with the light of the Trinity, O venerable Andrew. Wherefore, we all cry out to thee: Cease thou never to pray for us all.

*Ikos:* Wretch though I am, I desire to praise thy life, O father; and now aware because of thy corrections, I seek hence to receive the praises of thine adornments as gifts, O Andrew, and to weave a wreath for thy head, which even the angels hold in honor; and I cry out: Cease thou never to pray for us all!

Ode VII

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers quenched the flame and bedewed the children, who sang together: Blessed art Thou, O God!

That thou mightest behold the splendor of the saints, O venerable one, with the splendor of thy works thou didst illumine thy life, crying: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Clad in a body, thou didst emulate the ranks of the incorporeal ones, O venerable one, and, rejoicing together with them, thou criest out: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Jerusalem now rejoiceth in splendor, having shone thee forth upon the world as a beacon of great radiance, O blessed one, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* He Who before was incorporeal became incarnate of thy holy womb in His ­boundless loving-kindness, O all-pure one. To Him do we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Lord God of our fathers, Who in the beginning founded the earth and established the heavens by Thy word: blessed art Thou forever!

Shedding the robe of the passions, thou didst array thyself in the garment of dispassion, O venerable one; and in purity thou didst betroth thyself to Christ, and wast pleasing unto Him.

O honored Martha, thine offspring was shown to be a pillar of fire illumining the world and cleansing those in the world of dark ignorance and all wrath.

Thou didst put down the uprisings of the flesh, didst despise the machinations of the noetic foe, O venerable Martha, and didst cast their snares down to the ground.

*Theotokion:* O thou who art full of the grace of God, pray thou earnestly, that we who hymn and desire thee may behold the glory of thy Son and enjoy it in purity.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The children, forming a universal chorus in the furnace, chanted to Thee, the Creator of all: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O father, thou didst manifestly gladden the Church of the new ark, and didst form choirs, crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In the Church thou didst utter new hymnody to the Creator in holiness: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Laboring in godly manner with virtue, thou didst hymn the sufferings of all the saints who of old were made wondrous and perfect by Christ forever, O all-wise Andrew.

*Theotokion:* Come ye, let us hymn the divine Maiden with divine hymns, saying: Rejoice, O all-blessed Virgin, for whose sake joy hath been given to human nature!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Through poverty in transitory things thou didst acquire eternal riches and glory, O Martha; wherefore, thou didst cry out with love: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Knowing thy heart and desire, O venerable Martha, with heartfelt faith God divinely crowned him to whom thou gavest birth, and who crieth out to Him with faith for all ages.

The radiant day of thy festival illumineth the minds of the faithful and enlighteneth all the world like the morning star, shining even unto the ends of the earth.

*Theotokion:* He Who fashioned our nature, O Theotokos, having clad Himself therein through thee, transformeth and restoreth those who truly hymn and glorify thee as the Theotokos, in that He loveth mankind.

Ode IX

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O Isaiah! The Virgin hath conceived in her womb and borne a Son, Immanuel, both God and man. Orient is His name; and, magnifying Him, we call the Virgin blessed.

The proclamation of thy words, and the beauty and splendor of thy doctrines have passed all around the world, O blessed Andrew. Wherefore, Christ, the King of all, hath crowned thee with a crown of magnificence.

Enjoying the thrice-radiant light through a higher union, O Andrew, initiate of supernatural mysteries, by thy supplications preserve now from tribulations those who in sacred manner lovingly keep thy holy memory.

With the incorporeal ranks thou now rejoicest in the heavens; for, having continually lived their life while on earth, O divinely eloquent and right ­wondrous one, thou wast shown to be an excellent preacher of the Orthodox Faith.

*Theotokion:* Having truly given birth in manner past understanding to everlasting Life in the flesh, thou hast halted the unremitting onslaught of death; and, smiting its mouth, thou didst abolish bitter hell, O all-holy Virgin Mother.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* We magnify thee, the Mother of God, and we glorify thee, O Virgin Theotokos, as her who gave birth to the Savior of our souls.

Joining chorus with thy Son, O Martha, entreat Christ our God in behalf of those who honor thee.

Having lived piously amid toil, thou didst struggle manfully: wherefore thou hast uncovered heavenly riches.

We venerate the shrine of thy relics, O most honored Martha, from whence we draw forth waters of healing.

*Theotokion:* Thy prayer, emitting rays which surpass those of the sun, illumine those who magnify thee, O all-pure one.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…” —

Desiring the life of the angels, O venerable one, thou didst therefore manfully subdue the carnal passions, becoming angelic, O God-bearing father.

Theotokion —

All of us sinners have thee as an intercessor, O all-holy Virgin. By thy supplications move thy Son to clemency.

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VI —

O venerable father Andrew, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, beg peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

“Pondering Thy seedless conception and ineffable birthgiving, I marvel exceedingly: How is it that it is Thy will to die as a malefactor, O my Son?” the all-holy one cried out, weeping.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the church of the saints.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318 from the midpoint \[Heb. 8: 3-6\]

Brethren: Every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests who offer gifts according to the law: who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern shown thee in the mount. But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.

Alleluia, in Tone II —

Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Matthew, §21

\[ 7: 12-21\]

The Lord said: “All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one who saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he who doeth the will of my Father Who is in heaven.

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

