Also on The 5th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Uncovering of the Precious Relics of Our Venerable & God-bearing Father Sergius the Wonder-worker, Abbot of Radonezh

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

O the joy of the ranks of heaven and the gladness of men on earth, at the present festival of the sacred uncovering of the wonder-working relics of the venerable Sergius, great among the fathers. Through his supplications, O Christ, save Thou our souls. *Twice*

Today hath dawned the uncovering of the wonder-working relics of the blessed Sergius, sanctified from his mother’s womb, the man of God in heaven and angel in the flesh on earth; and it calleth all the fullness of the Church to send up glory to Christ God.

The angels rejoice in heaven above, and men join chorus on earth below. Adorned, the Church of God is jubilant, O father Sergius, over the translation of thy precious relics, crying aloud unto Christ: Thou art my might and confirmation, O Christ!

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Come, all ye ends of the earth, rejoicing with psalms and spiritual songs, and let us piously praise the honored translation of our helper; and, surrounding him and his wonder-working shrine, let us invoke his aid, saying thus: O all-blessed father Sergius, by thy supplications grant victory over all heresies to our Christ-loving hierarchs, and protect their reason-endowed flock in peace, granting them the conquest of all their enemies; and save thou our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

No one who hath recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

Prokimenon of the day.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…” —

Thou wast the dwelling-place of the all-holy Spirit, O father. By thy supplications show us to be the habitation of the Holy Trinity, O divinely wise Sergius, who art most rich.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Come, O ye faithful, and, rejoicing, let us enter the church in gladness of heart, venerating the precious relics of the divinely wise Sergius; and let us receive healing and forgiveness of sins through his supplications.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Accept the hymnody of thy children, O father Sergius, and grant the petitions which are profitable for those who love thee and hymn the uncovering of thy relics.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

O Virgin Theotokos, the choirs on high chant with those below, unceasingly glorifying thine all-pure birthgiving.

Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII —

From thy youth thou didst receive Christ within thy soul, O venerable one, and didst desire more than all to withdraw from the tumult of the world. Thou didst manfully dwell in the wilderness, and therein didst produce the fruit of humility, the children of obedience. Wherefore, as thou becamest the abode of the Trinity, thou hast illumined with thy miracles all who have recourse to thee with faith, granting healing in abundance unto all. O Sergius our father, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, and as God revealed the resurrection: disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…” —

When, before thy birth, she who had conceived thee went to the church of God, thou didst cry out thrice within her womb, glorifying the Trinity, O divinely wise father Sergius. And before thou didst come to know the world, thou didst know God, and wast known of God, O all-blessed one, making manifest unto all the radiance of the grace of God which would descend upon thee, and showing forth the purity of thy soul and body through the splendors of thy countenance, for which thou becamest a chosen vessel of Christ our God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

When the zeal of God came upon thee, O divinely wise and most blessed father Sergius, thou didst overcome all things in the world, and, loving Christ alone with all thy soul, and following His life-bearing footsteps, thou didst attain unto the wilderness; and having planted it with the seed of thy labors and watered it with showers of thy tears, thou didst multiply the fruits of the virtues; and, having fed thy children therewith, thou didst lead them unto Christ God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

When thou, O divinely wise one, didst hear the divine voice saying to thee: “Lo! the all-pure one cometh!”, then, in great ascetic struggle, thou didst earnestly pray that thou be vouchsafed her awesome visitation; and straightway a light outshining the sun in brightness illumined thee, O venerable one, and thou wast vouchsafed to behold the Mistress Mother of God with both spiritual and bodily eyes, and with thine ears thou didst hear her sweet voice saying: “I shall ever be in this place, and thy monastery shall lack for nothing!” Her do thou beseech, that she save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

When the time arrived for thy departure unto God, then thou didst hasten, like an all-radiant star, to the mansions of heaven, and there thou standest with the choirs of the saints before the throne of the consubstantial Trinity; and thy blessed and precious body, which for many years was covered by the earth, hath now been surrendered by the ground and emitteth the splendor of miracles upon those who honor thine uncovering, O divinely wise Sergius. Grant victories over all heresies to our Christ-loving hierarchs, and ask of Christ our God forgiveness of sins for all the faithful. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Come, all ye faithful, ye assemblies of the Church of Russia, and let us delight in the present splendid festival! Come, ye fullness of the priesthood, ye company of monks, and see how the Church of God is adorned, filled with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs; and the honored and glorious monastery of the divinely blessed father Sergius is filled with gladness and joy at the uncovering of his precious relics. And giving voice to praise, it calleth the whole world joyfully to cry out to the Lord: O Christ our Master, Thou hast given to Thy holy Orthodox Church a mighty warrior, an invincible weapon against our enemies, visible and invisible, and an infinite treasury of inexhaustible gifts for the Christian people. Through his supplications grant great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

At Litia, these stichera —

*In Tone VI:* Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, ye company of fasters; and, assembling with faith today, let us honor Sergius the true faster, who gladly following in his Master’s footsteps, trod the narrow path and the life of dispassion; and let us cry out with faith: O most blessed one, companion of the venerable and boast of fasters, entreat the Lord in our behalf, that our souls find mercy.

O venerable and God-bearing Sergius, thou didst forsake all for the sake of Christ’s love, and, having entered the wilderness, wast in nowise affrighted by the machinations of the invisible foe; for even though they descended upon thee many times, gnashing their teeth and displaying their rage, by thy supplications thou didst cause them to vanish like smoke without a trace. O thine immaculate soul and mighty endurance! Unceasingly beseech Christ, that our souls be saved.

O most sacred and great Church of Russia, having drunk of the streams of the wellspring of the Gospel with the Orthodox princes, monks and layfolk, let us be glad in the Spirit on this appointed feast of the good shepherd and teacher; and, surrounding his healing relics, let us lovingly venerate them and crown them with hymns and praises as with flowers, saying: Rejoice, O blessed Sergius, thou heavenly man and earthly angel, dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit! Rejoice, for thou hast guided man to the path of salvation! Rejoice, thou boast and confirmation of our Orthodox hierarchs, O venerable and God-pleasing Sergius, all-radiant lamp unto thy native land, and intercessor for our souls!

*In Tone VIII:* Today heaven is glad on high, and the earth rejoiceth with men. Let the newly-elect assemblies of Russia join chorus, and let the companies of monastics hold splendid festival! And the Holy Church of God, wondrous in righteousness, illumined as with all-radiant beams, filled with the manifold miracles which flow forth from the precious and healing relics of the venerable father Sergius, calleth the whole world to praise his struggles. Wherefore, assembling all together, we who with gladness celebrate his uncovering in hymns and songs do hymn Christ our God, that through his supplications He grant us peace and great mercy.

Today the festival of the translation of the relics of our divinely blessed father Sergius hath dawned! Come, all ye faithful, let us crown the Church of God with hymns, and therein let us glorify Christ our God, Who is hymned in Trinity, crying out and saying: O Christ our Master, Thou hast given Thy favorite unto the city of Moscow as a steadfast rampart; to all the parts of Russia Thou hast shown him to be a mighty intercessor, and to the Christian people Thou hast revealed him as a bestower of miracles, a healer of incurable infirmities, an expeller of demons, and an intercessor for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Come, ye multitude of monastics, and with songs and hymns let us praise Sergius today, the emulator of piety; and, surrounding his precious and healing shrine, let us lovingly venerate it, saying: Rejoice, O all-glorious Sergius, all-radiant beacon for thy native land! Rejoice, for in purity thou hast united thyself to the most pure Light! Rejoice, for thou standest with the angels before the Trinity, to Whom do thou unceasingly pray, that great mercy be granted to our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We beseech thee, O Mistress: Pray thou with the holy royal passion-bearers and all the new martyrs, that the Lord have mercy upon our souls.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign…” —

O Lord, Thou hast granted to Thy Church an adornment: the precious and much-healing relics of Thy favorite, the venerable Sergius, and possessing them like a royal ornament, she is adorned, and bearing them like an all-splendid crown she rejoiceth, summoning her children, whom she begat in the Gospel by water and the Spirit. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, O Jesus Who lovest mankind, Thou Savior of our souls.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

O Lord, Thou hast given invincible might to the reigning city of Moscow, and confirmation to all the lands of Russia, and to Thine honored monastery steadfast fortification and an unshakable bulwark: the healing and holy relics of the all-blessed Sergius who loveth Thee. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving compassions, O omnipotent Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

O Lord, Thou hast given to Thy faithful servants, our Orthodox hierarchs, steadfast defense and weaponry of salvation, and to all pious Orthodox people great victory over the adversary, a precious adornment to priests, and free healing to all the sick: the holy relics of the venerable and thrice-blessed Sergius, which we now venerate with joy, receiving divers healings; and we glorify Thine ineffable loving-kindness, O kind-hearted Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Sergius our father; for by thy steps have we learned how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, having labored for Christ, hast denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels and companion of the righteous and the venerable. With them do thou entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone IV —

From thy youth thou didst receive Christ within thy soul, O venerable one, and didst desire more than all to withdraw from the tumult of the world. Thou didst manfully dwell in the wilderness, and therein didst produce the fruit of humility, the children of obedience. Wherefore, as thou becamest the abode of the Trinity, thou hast illumined with thy miracles all who have recourse to thee with faith, granting healing in abundance unto all. O Sergius our father, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

AT MATINS

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…” —

The day of thy memorial hath arrived, O all-praised father Sergius, gladdening thy chosen flock; and thereon we celebrate with honor the uncovering of thy holy relics and magnify with joy the Lord Who hath given thee the grace of miracles, crying aloud: Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who hath given healing to all through thee! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, the Master of all became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, at his cry, as the righteous David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, having borne thy Creator. Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who came forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

Let our great pastor now be praised! And with hymns let the godly Sergius be praised: the all-radiant pillar of monasticism who sheddeth upon us the radiance of miracles, which proceed from his all-precious relics, and who like a dew-bearing cloud extinguisheth the flame of our passions, bedewing the minds of the faithful! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, God to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting do thou unceasingly entreat with the hosts on high, that He grant to those who ever glorify thee with faith and love the remission of all our sins and correction of life.

Polyeleos, and magnification —

We bless thee, O venerable father Sergius, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses —

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…” —

We all earnestly beseech thee, the merciful favorite of Christ, our pastor and teacher, and we lovingly kiss thy precious relics, and joyfully cry out with all our soul: Destroy the incursions of the heathen and bring them under Christian authority, dispel the phantasms of the demons from the flock of thy disciples, and deliver from all temptations those who hymn thee with love, O venerable Sergius. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Incomprehensible and unattainable by the mind is the awesome divine mystery wrought in thee, O divinely joyous Mistress; for, having conceived the Infinite One, thou gavest birth to Him, Who clothed Himself in flesh through thine all-pure blood. Him do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VIII —

O venerable father, thou didst despise the beauty of the world and the food which passeth away, loving the monastic life more than them; and thou wast vouchsafed to become a converser with angels and the greatly radiant beacon of the Russian land, shining forth in miracles like another sun. Be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy sacred memory; for we are thy children and the reason-endowed sheep of thy teachings, and we call upon thee for help, asking that through thee we may receive peace and great mercy.

Canon of supplication to the all-holy Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 8 troparia, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Parting the abyss of the Red Sea, God drowned Pharaoh therein, but led Moses across to the wilderness dryshod, and rained down manna as food for the people of Israel, in that He is mighty.

With the light of Thee, the three-Sunned Godhead, O my Creator, illumine the darkened eyes of my soul, I beseech Thee, and cleanse Thou my heart, that I may hymn the uncovering of the precious relics of the venerable Sergius, who loved Thee.

Grant me words for the opening of my mouth, O Word of God, make my tongue brilliant, O Merciful One, and be Thou not mindful of the multitude of my sins, that, guided by Thy grace, I may hymn Thy venerable saint, Sergius.

As thou didst preach the Trinity by crying out within thy mother’s womb, so did the Trinity glorify thee. Lo! thy precious relics, hidden for so many years beneath the ground, were found to be incorrupt, filling the faithful with sweet fragrance and miracles.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mistress who art more exalted than the hosts of heaven, and gavest birth to the Savior and Creator of all, Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit: grant us discourse, O all-hymned one, that we may hymn thee who art the helper of our race.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Let the vainglorious sage boast not, but let him consider this: There is none as holy as God, Who exalteth our horn, granting might to our rulers.

Strengthened by the power of the Cross of the Lord, thou didst make the spiritual passions and reasoning of the flesh subject to thy spirit; wherefore, thou becamest an all-comely habitation of the all-holy Spirit and the chosen resting-place of the indivisible Trinity.

By thy life in this world having become a model for all who have labored for Christ with all their soul, thou didst shine forth in purity like the sun; wherefore, thou hast received recompense an hundredfold from the hand of the Almighty, O divinely wise Sergius, for which cause we joyfully call thee blessed.

Come, let us now come together on this present feast, and let us behold and be filled with joy, that we may glorify Christ Who hath so glorified those who glorify Him, and hath given us the divinely blessed Sergius as an invincible rampart and bestower of miracles.

*Theotokion:* Rejoicing, we offer thee thanks together with hymnody, O Mother of God, for in the flesh thou gavest birth to Almighty God, Who hath given thee to Christians as a steadfast intercessor.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

With great abstinence thou didst sail across the sea of life, and thou hast put in at the calm harbor, the mansions of heaven. Thou shinest like a radiant star, and like a never-setting sun dost illumine the whole world with the lightning-flashes of thy miracles, and enlightenest the flock of thy disciples. To our pious Orthodox hierarchs and all the faithful thou grantest forgiveness of sins, correction of life, and victory over the adversary, that, standing joyfully round about thine honored and much-healing shrine, we may lovingly venerate thy holy relics and cry aloud to thee, as to a solicitous father: O divinely wise and all-blessed father Sergius, entreat the Holy Trinity, for Whom thou didst labor in this life, that we who honor the uncovering of thy precious relics with love may be granted remission of sins. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee who gavest birth to God in the flesh, without seed, as the only Virgin among mothers; for the Fire of the Godhead made His abode within thee, and with milk thou didst feed the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy Offspring.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, and the earth hath been filled with Thy glory, O Christ. Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst cleave unto God from thy mother’s womb, O blessed father Sergius, and loving poverty of spirit didst have in thy heart the fear of God as the beginning of wisdom, the root and foundation of all good things. Wherefore, Christ the Master hath enriched thee with miracles.

Like a fragrant lily thy precious relics have emerged from the bosom of the earth, O all-blessed Sergius, and like a treasure they emit the radiance of miracles, gladdening thy spiritual children.

Today the royal city of Moscow rejoiceth, and the whole world is filled with gladness; and thy monastery, O divinely blessed Sergius, boasting, is adorned, having thy precious relics within it as an inexhaustible and all-wondrous treasure.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Lady, Queen of all creation, who wast foretold by many prophets and gavest birth to the King of the hosts of heaven: Grant victory to thy servants, our pious Orthodox hierarchs, over all heresies, O Lady, and by thy supplications vouchsafe unto us all the kingdom of heaven.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou art my portion and the glory of my countenance; for by the knowledge of God Thou alone hast delivered me from the darkness of ignorance. I pray to Thee, O Christ: Grant peace to Thy servant, in that Thou lovest mankind!

The Holy Church, wondrous in righteousness in the Trinity our God, is splendidly adorned, O divinely wise Sergius, and a multitude of the people spiritually rejoice, beholding thee carried with honor in the arms of the hierarch of God, upborne upon the shoulders of the priests.

Filled with joy at the visitation of the Mother of God, thou becamest a light for thy flock and a guide for the new Israel, O father, leading us from earth to the mansions of heaven, where thou now enjoyest ineffable effulgence.

Thy mother’s womb was sanctified by thine honored conception, and the glorious city of Rostov was rendered splendid by thy nativity; thy great and most glorious monastery hath been glorified by thy struggles, and the whole world hath been filled with thy miracles, O venerable father Sergius.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mother of God, thou steadfast helper of those who set their hope on thee, O protection and guardian of our city, invincible bulwark of this holy community, and weapon of salvation for our devout hierarchs: Save all who piously venerate thy holy image.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Let not the watery tempest drown me, nor the abyss destroy me; for I have been cast into the depths of the heart of the sea. Wherefore, like Jonah I cry aloud: Let my life ascend to Thee out of the corruption of evils, O God!

Having loved Christ from childhood, O father Sergius, following His life-bearing footsteps thou didst flee this world, and didst attain unto the never-waning light of understanding, where thou now standest with boldness before the Holy Trinity, Whom do thou beseech in behalf of us all.

The ranks of the incorporeal ones marvelled at thy life in the flesh, and the hordes of the demons were affrighted by the victory which God gave thee over them; and we glorify thee, O venerable Sergius, standing round about the shrine of thy precious relics, and we magnify Christ who hath glorified thee with miracles.

By thy supplications, O all-blessed father Sergius, ask what is beneficial for all who venerate the honored and glorious uncovering of thy holy relics with love and pure faith, and who celebrate thy sacred memory with splendor.

*Theotokion:* Having conceived the Creator and Savior of all without seed in thy womb, O Mistress Mother of God, and given birth to Christ God in the flesh, by thy supplications render Him merciful unto us, that we all may be counted worthy of His revelation and kingdom.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…” —

Thy precious relics, shining forth from the ground today like the all-radiant sun, have been found to be incorrupt, resplendent with a multitude of miracles like a fragrant flower, pouring forth divers healings upon all the faithful, and gladdening thy chosen flock, which, having wisely assembled, thou didst shepherd well. In their behalf thou now standest in supplication before the Trinity, praying that victory be granted to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, that we may all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise Sergius!

*Ikos:* Having disdained that which is in the world, O divinely wise father, thou didst acquire incorrupt habitations which are above the world, and having been enriched with abundant gifts by the right hand of the Almighty, in accordance with the number of thy virtues, and been crowned with the wreath of honor as a victory, thou dost enrich with miracles all who hymn thee thus: Rejoice, O thou who, before thy nativity, didst glorify the Holy Trinity by a threefold exclamation; rejoice, thou who didst consider the beauty and glory of the world to be as dung! Rejoice, for thou didst make thine abode in the wilderness; rejoice, for thou didst make of it a city! Rejoice, for therein thou didst erect an all-honored temple for the praise of the Holy Trinity; rejoice, for, having assembled therein multitudes of monastics, thou didst lead them to the Lord! Rejoice, for thou wast vouchsafed the merciful visitation of the Mother of God; rejoice, for thou didst serve her in the flesh like an angel! Rejoice, for thou prayest to the Lord in behalf of those who honor the uncovering of thy precious relics; rejoice, for thou art a weapon of salvation for our Orthodox hierarchs and a vanquisher of all heresies! Preserve them ever in health and gladness, that we may all celebrate thine uncovering with splendor, joyously crying: Rejoice, O divinely wise Sergius!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Deliver us not up utterly, for Thy holy name’s sake, neither disannul Thou Thy covenant, and cause not Thy mercy to depart from us, O Lord God of our fathers, Who art supremely hymned forever.

By divine preservation was thy precious body kept intact, O divinely wise Sergius, which was covered wholly by the earth for many years, and it emerged, untouched by any harm. And we, thy children, beholding it, cry out with joy: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou wast clothed in the raiment of gladness, and thy precious head was crowned with a wreath of joy; and thou hast entered in splendor into the heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ the King, receiving honor for thy labors, and chanting to the Lord: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Resplendent in thy radiant life, O wondrous Sergius, in this life thou didst attain unto the ranks of the incorporeal ones; and thou now joinest chorus with them before the throne of the God of all, Whom do thou beg, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate the memory of the uncovering of thy precious relics.

*Theotokion:* Offer supplication, O all-pure Virgin Mistress, unto our God Who was born of thee, and Who through thee hath restored Adam and renewed our nature, that we may all cry out to thee: O all-pure one, blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Master Who hast created all things in Thy wisdom, Thou hast established the earth as a weight upon the deep, planting its foundation upon the boundless waters. Wherefore, we all cry out, chanting: Bless the Lord unceasingly, O ye works of the Lord!

The Church of God is glad today, arrayed as in a robe of royal purple; and thy holy monastery, O divinely blessed Sergius, doth possess as a treasure beyond price thy precious body which imparteth divers healings unto all who chant with faith: Bless the Lord unceasingly, O ye works of the Lord!

The temple of God is illumined with heavenly light, and therein the assemblies of the pious rejoice, beholding thee, O divinely blessed Sergius, borne in the hands of the hierarchs and venerated with mouth and soul by all the faithful who cry out to Christ: Bless the Lord unceasingly, O ye works of the Lord!

Standing now with the armies of heaven before the Trinity, and dwelling with the choirs of all the saints, ask thou for forgiveness of sins to be given to those who honor thy memory with faith; and to us who celebrate with splendor the uncovering of thy precious relics grant salvation, that, rejoicing, we may chant: Bless the Lord unceasingly, O ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* The Preëternal One is conceived in thy womb, O pure Virgin, and the perfect God, Who is born an Infant in the flesh, of thee, the Maiden who knew not wedlock, is seen by men to be perfect God and man, equally enthroned with the Father and the Spirit. Him do we exalt supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* On the mountain did Moses behold the unconsumed bush; and in the cave did Joseph hear the ineffable birth. O Theotokos, Virgin undefiled, Mother who knewest not man: thee do we magnify!

Thou wast taken up to the heights of heaven by the virtues, O divinely wise Sergius, and in gladness of heart thou standest before the throne of the Holy Trinity. Forget not thy servants, but grant perfect health and wondrous victory over all heresies to our pious Orthodox hierarchs, that we may all magnify thee unceasingly with hymns.

More brightly than the rays of the sun, O God-bearer, doth thine all-glorious memory illumine the faithful who piously honor thee, who venerate the shrine of thy precious relics with faith and love, and praise thee in hymns, O divinely wise Sergius.

O divinely blessed father Sergius, accept thou this small supplication, offered to thee by mine unworthy hand and with heartfelt love, and by thy supplications grant salvation for our souls, health for our bodies and peace for the world, that we may magnify thee all the more in hymnody.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Virgin Mistress, Mother of Christ our God, save all who set their hope on thee, who have recourse to thine aid, and in hymns piously magnify thee, who art the Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

Assembling today, those of heaven rejoice with those on earth, and the companies of the faithful, together with the priests and monks, are filled with spiritual gladness and the gifts of thy miracles, O venerable Sergius, glorifying the Lord on the day of thine uncovering. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Virgin, who gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the eternal Word of the Father, Christ the Physician of men: Heal thou the grievous and long-standing wounds and sores of my heart, and quell thou the uprisings of the passions of my flesh.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As a greatly radiant star of Christ, the never-setting Sun, thou dost enlighten all with the beams of thy virtues, O divinely wise father Sergius, blessed of God, and with the radiance of miracles thou dost illumine all the ends of the earth and those who with faith cherish thy holy memory and splendidly honor in hymns the venerable uncovering of thy relics. *Twice*

Thou hast been shown to be a beacon of great radiance, a most excellent physician of the sick, and a right prudent shepherd of monastics, a weapon of salvation for our pious Orthodox hierarchs, victory over the enemy, the adornment of all the land of Russia, a constant advocate for all who invoke thy name with faith, O Sergius, and celebrate the uncovering of thy precious relics with love.

Like a fragrant flower, incense of sweet savor, a divine phial of myrrh, thou dost emit the scent of thy sweet perfume upon all nations, and with the lightning-flashes of thy miracles thou dost illumine the Christian people, who celebrate thy sacred memory with faith, O venerable and divinely blessed Sergius.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Having assembled today, O ye faithful Christian people, let us be filled with joy, and, forming a choir, let us spiritually celebrate the right eminent festival of the venerable father, crying out to Christ in psalms and hymns: O Master Christ, to our latterday race thou hast revealed such a bestower of miracles, the great ally of the whole Russian land! O venerable and divinely wise father Sergius, earnestly beseech Christ our God in behalf of all who honor thee with faith and love!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

No one who hath recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the venerable one.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213 \[5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\].

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

