Also on The 6th Day of the Month of July

Commemoration of the Holy & Righteous Virgin Juliana, Princess Ol’shanskaya

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Adorned with the purity of virginity, thou didst blamelessly and righteously finish thine earthly course, O right laudable Juliana, and by thy blessed end didst join thyself to the immortal Bridegroom, Who after thy death did splendidly glorify thee, His beloved bride, with incorruption and miracles, and in thee hath given us a tireless intercessor for our souls. *Thrice*

On the chariot of the virtues thou didst mount to the habitations on high, O beauteous virgin Juliana, and hast left us thy precious relics, blossoming with incorruption and pouring forth miracles, as a rich inheritance. Wherefore, celebrating their uncovering with splendor, we beseech thee, O bride of Christ: Pray thou continuously to the Lord in behalf of our souls. *Thrice*

Wounded in heart by the beauty of the incorrupt Bridegroom, thou didst love Him with all thy soul, O virgin Juliana; and preserving thy virginity unsullied for Him, thou wast vouchsafed to enter into His bridal-chamber. Delighting there in endless blessedness with the saints, in thy supplications to the Lord remember those who honor thy holy memory with love, and pray thou for our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Standing at the right hand of Christ the Savior, in the choir of the holy virgins, O virgin princess Juliana, thou delightest in the contemplation of His all-radiant face. Having thyself received unwaning radiance therefrom, thou shinest forth graciously upon those in the darkness of passions and tribulations, and impartest healings unto the sick who with faith hasten to the shrine of thy holy relics. Wherefore, by thy supplications preserve us from ailments of soul and body, and win for us the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birth–giving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(3:1-9\).

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

\(5:15-6:3\).

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, Who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

\(4: 7-15\).

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was loved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, That His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Thou didst restrain the temporal passions, and cast off the pleasures of the flesh, O blessed Juliana, remaining in unsullied virginity from thy youth, that thou mightest be well-pleasing to Jesus most sweet, Who loved the beauty of thy soul, and betrothed thee as an incorrupt bride for Himself. Having acquired boldness before Him, by thy supplications preserve the city and monastery which keep thy precious relics; and pray thou continually for those who honor thy holy memory.

*Stichos:* Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

Thy comeliness of body and the divine beauty of thy soul were wondrously yoked together, O all-beauteous virgin Juliana, and they made thee truly worthy of the immortal Bridegroom, Who chose and loved thee, and enriched thee greatly with spiritual gifts. And clad in them as with robes, thou didst enter His bridal-chamber in paradise, and there didst receive the crown of the heavenly kingdom from the hand of the Ruler of all. Standing before Him in never-waning glory, pray thou continually for those who honor thy holy memory.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Standing round about thine honored shrine, O good and ever-glorious virgin Juliana, we offer thee hymns of praise as is meet, as to one who prayeth for us at the throne of the Lord of glory, imparting gifts of healing in abundance unto those who have recourse to thee with faith. Deprive us not also thereof, for we stand in need of thine aid; and pray thou to the Lord in behalf of those who honor thy holy memory.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

The heights of nobility and worldly comforts did not wrest thy heart away from the love of Christ, O righteous Juliana; wherefore, to thy princely diadem thou didst join the incorrupt crown of betrothal to Christ, and through holiness and purity didst wed thyself to Him Who is more comely than the sons of men. Having united thyself with Him through mighty love, thou now dancest in splendor in the mansions of paradise, as an all-comely virgin and bride of Christ.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

At the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII —

As an immaculate bride of Christ, the incorrupt Bridegroom, O righteous virgin Juliana, with the radiant lamp of good works thou didst enter into His heavenly bridal-chamber, and there dost delight with the saints in eternal blessedness. Wherefore, entreat Him Whom thou lovest, and to Whom thou didst betroth thy virginity, that He save our souls. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone —

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, and as God revealed the resurrection: Disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…” —

Having finished this temporal life in piety, by thy blessed end thou didst pass over to life immortal, O most honored Juliana. Like a full moon thou shinest forth rays of never-waning light, illumining the night of our passions and sufferings with the effulgence of the many miracles wherewith thou hast been enriched by the Lord Who hath crowned thee with a crown of incorrupt glory. Entreat Him in behalf of us who celebrate thy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure Ever-virgin, fervent intercessor, invincible, excellent and unashamed hope, rampart and protection, and haven for those who flee unto thee: With the angels and the virgin Juliana entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace and salvation to the world, and great mercy.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

A wellspring of healings, O right laudable Juliana, hath thy tomb been shown to be, which the earth did not conceal, but put forth from its bosom for our enrichment. And beholding thy relics therein, blossoming with incorruption, we rejoice and give thanks to the Lord Who hath vouchsafed us such a gift. Him do thou ever entreat for the salvation of our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Theotokos, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all tribulation, for thou gavest birth to Christ the Savior, the Deliverer of our souls.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy and righteous virgin Juliana, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Having divinely wedded thyself unto the Lord, for Him alone didst thou preserve thy virginity immaculate, O virgin Juliana, and thou didst receive His divine bridal-chamber as an everlasting inheritance, illumined with the radiant brilliance of the effulgence of heaven. Wherefore, having received never-waning splendor, illumine our darkened souls with rays of the grace of God, and entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Through the supplications of the Theotokos, Thy good Mother who knew not man, O Christ, of Thine incorporeal ones, and Thy forerunner, the apostles, prophets, martyrs, and all the saints, grant that we may walk in Thy light; and in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy vouchsafe that we may inherit Thy kingdom.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 104

\[Mt. 25: 1-13\]

The Lord spake this parable: “The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made: ‘Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.’ Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: ‘Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.’ But the wise answered, saying: ‘Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.’ And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ But he answered and said: ‘Verily I say unto you, I know you not.’ Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

The pleasures of life which drag us down, and the glory of the princely state, didst thou spurn out of love for Christ, O blessed Juliana, and while yet of a youthful age thou didst display spiritual wisdom, wherewith thou didst render impotent all the darts of the temptations of the enemy ; and as one victorious thou didst receive a crown of heavenly glory from the right hand of the Most High. Him do thou entreat, that He vouchsafe us eternal blessedness.

Canon of Supplication to the All-holy Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and this canon of the righteous virgin, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O Jesus, King of hosts, immortal Word of God: Grant me the discourse and intelligence, that I may hymn Thine immaculate bride, the righteous virgin Juliana, whom Thou hast radiantly glorified with incorruption and miracles.

Wounded with desire for immortal life and the beauty of Him Who is more comely than all the sons of men, thy heart captivated thou didst hasten after Him with faith, O divinely wise Juliana.

In godly manner thou didst array thyself in garments of purity, and didst clothe thyself in the vesture of immaculate virginity, O beauteous virgin. Wherefore, Christ loved the comeliness of thy soul.

*Theotokion:* Strengthened by the grace of Him Who shone forth from thy womb, O all-immaculate one, the choirs of virgins were led in unto Him in thy train, rejoicing and crying out: Thou art the boast of the virginal!

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Strengthened by the power of God, O Juliana, while yet in thy youth thou didst overcome the uprisings of the passions, having one desire: faithfully to be well-pleasing unto Christ alone, and to serve Him blamelessly in holiness and purity.

A divine miracle of the goodness of God was revealed in thee, O holy virgin — how thou, a young maiden, didst vanquish the machinations of ancient Belial — for in thy weakness was the power of God gloriously glorified.

Thou didst love heavenly wisdom from childhood, O unblemished ewe-lamb Juliana, and instructed therein, thou didst consider the glory of princely rank, riches and beauty to be as nought, that thou mightest be pleasing unto Christ.

*Theotokion:* Reasoning in Orthodox manner, we proclaim thee to be the true and most immaculate Mother of God; for through thee was the Creator pleased to unite Himself with us.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

All-adorned with the beauty of virginity, O immaculate bride, holy virgin Juliana, thou didst enter, rejoicing, into the bridal-chamber of Christ, where the choirs of the angels and the councils of the saints lovingly greeted thee, and the King of glory Himself, thy beloved Bridegroom, looked mercifully upon thee, and crowned thee with a crown of immortality. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He not deprive us, who are made of earth and dust, of the inheritance of His kingdom.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure and most immaculate one, who knewest not wedlock, who alone gavest birth in time to the timeless Son and Word of God: With the holy and honorable apostles, martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us cleansing and great mercy.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

To the sounds of angelic hymnody thou didst enter into marriage with the Lamb, O Juliana, bride of Christ, and didst receive the grace of miracles as a token of your betrothal to Christ, wherewith thou treatest the infirmities of men.

With divine miracles and the incorruption of thy virginal body dost thou assure us that thy life was well-pleasing unto God, O favorite of God, and that thou hast received a heavenly reward with the saints.

Thou didst offer gifts unto Christ — unsullied virginity, a silent mouth and a meek heart — O blessed Juliana; and by the labors of asceticism thou didst win the kingdom of heaven, wherein thou delightest in everlasting blessedness.

*Theotokion:* Like rain upon the fleece which the Prophet Gideon beheld of old did the Lord descend upon thy womb, O all-immaculate one. Thou gavest birth to Him in two natures for the salvation of us who cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Like a treasure of great price were thy relics, blossoming with incorruption, found in the earth through the wondrous providence of God, O holy virgin Juliana; for thou didst most beautifully rest in the grave with a radiant face and the ornaments of a virgin, unharmed by corruption.

Having died in the body, thou art alive in spirit, O God-pleasing princess; wherefore, thou didst appear in a vision to Peter \[Moghila\], the first hierarch of the Church of Kiev, commanding Him to render fitting honor to thy relics.

Acknowledging thy holiness, the holy hierarch Peter had thy holy relics clad in new and magnificent garments, O righteous Juliana; and he placed them with honor in the Great Church, and decreed that thy memory ever be celebrated, in that thou art a true favorite of God

*Theotokion:* Raise me up who have fallen into the pit of the passions, and guide me to the haven of salvation, O only most immaculate one who gavest birth to God the Helmsman Who by grace hath united those above to those below, who had formerly been separated.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

The mindless and sacrilegious robber who stole the ring from thy hand thou didst punish terribly, O favorite of God, for he straightway bitterly gave up his soul at the entrance to the church and fell prey to the devil.

Desiring to assure the right reverend abbot that thou truly restest with the saints in the mansions of paradise, thou didst appear to him in a vision among a choir of holy virgins, O blessed Juliana, and didst upbraid him for not believing that thou hadst been numbered by God among the holy virgins who were well-pleasing to Him.

Thy holy relics pour forth healings upon the infirm, O princess Juliana, and the demons tremble before them; for great power is given thee by God against unclean spirits. From their oppression free us also through thy right acceptable supplications.

*Theotokion:* Beholding the fulfillment of thy words, we magnify thee who hast magnified our race, O Mother of God; for giving birth unto One of the Trinity thou becamest an animate chariot of the Godhead. Wherefore, all generations now truly call thee blessed.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII —

We know thee to be an animate temple of God right beautifully adorned with virginal purity, O holy and righteous virgin princess Juliana; wherefore, celebrating the discovery of thy holy relics with love, we beseech thee, O excellent mediatress of our desires: Carry thy supplications for us to the Lord, and by thine intercession at the throne of the Most High free us from all misfortunes, that we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O holy virgin Juliana, all-comely bride of Christ!

*Ikos:* Loving the purity beloved of the angels, O holy and righteous virgin, thou didst blamelessly finish thine earthly life, having acquired in the flesh the ways of the angels; wherefore, thou now dwellest in the mansions of paradise with the incorporeal ones and all the saints, and hearest from us who honor thee these hymns of praise: Rejoice, God-loving daughter of noble parents; rejoice, thou who didst wondrously join a princely diadem with the crown of immortality! Rejoice, thou who didst not desire to know an earthly betrothed instead of the heavenly One; rejoice, thou who didst blamelessly preserve thy virginity for Christ alone! Rejoice, thou who in thy youth didst love Jesus most sweet with all thy soul; rejoice, thou who maintained thy fidelity to Him unto the end of thy life! Rejoice, thou who hast been glorified by the Lord with incorruption and miracles; rejoice, thou who abundantly pourest forth gracious healings! Rejoice, ever-shining lamp illumining the Holy Church; rejoice, priceless treasure given by God to the Lavra of the Caves! Rejoice, cure for our bodies provided without any charge; rejoice, diligent intercessor before the Lord for our souls! Rejoice, O holy virgin Juliana, all-comely bride of Christ!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Even though death touched thee through the law of nature, O divinely wise Juliana, yet dost thou emit a ray of immortality from thy tomb; for clothed with life-bearing mortality in Christ, thou didst most beautifully blossom forth with miraculous incorruption.

The laws of nature were altered in thee in manner past understanding and comprehension, O wondrous virgin Juliana; for lying for many years in a grave in the bosom of the earth, thou wast shown to be incorrupt, thy face blossoming, as one who in the Lord slept the sleep of the righteous.

Desiring to behold the beauty of the all-radiant countenance of Christ, O pure virgin, thou didst reject an earthly bridegroom, that thou mightest wed thyself to Christ forever. And thou didst offer immaculate purity unto Him as a costly dowry. Wherefore, He loved the beauty of thy soul.

*Theotokion:* Spare me, O Christ, when thou wilt judge the earth with glory. Dispel the gloom of my passions through the supplications of the immaculate Virgin who gave Thee birth, and with her receive also the righteous Juliana who prayeth for me, in that Thou art good and great in mercy.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy splendid memorial is joy for the faithful, O blessed Juliana, for therein hath the triumph of Orthodoxy been made manifest; for only in the bosom of the One Orthodox Church doth the grace-bearing incorruption flourish, wherewith thou hast been divinely invested, receiving fitting honor.

Christ gave thee an inexhaustible wealth of healings, O maiden, and instead of an earthly principality enriched thee with the inheritance of a heavenly kingdom, as one who loved Him sincerely with all thy soul. Wherefore, entreat His goodness, that He not deprive us, the benighted, of enlightenment from on high and the goodly portion of the saints.

Thy holy relics pour forth streams of healing, O God-pleasing princess, wherewith thou dost bedew our souls with grace, and healest our bodies of multifarious ailments: for thou hast received rich gifts of healing from the Lord.

*Theotokion:* O thou who gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the preëternal Word, the Physician of souls and bodies, heal thou the sores and wounds of my soul, which are grievous and of long standing, and assuage the pain of my heart, O Virgin.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

The Holy Lavra of the Caves danceth, having thy wonder-working relics as a priceless treasure, O Juliana, from whence, as from an inexhaustible wellspring, thou pourest forth healings upon the faithful; wherefore, with love we bless thee with hymns of praise.

Thou hast been shown to be like a radiant star illumining the noetic heaven of the Lavra of the Caves with grace, O righteous virgin; and with the purity of thy life thou shinest upon all who desire to live in holiness of life, that through thee all might be sanctified to the love of Christ God.

O immaculate turtle-dove, thou didst fly beneath the shelter of the heavenly Eagle, and didst find goodly rest with Him, O right laudable Juliana. Bear thou our thoughts up to Him, and teach us to emulate the purity of thy life and thy fervent love for Christ God.

*Theotokion:* Blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, O pure one, Whom the hosts of heaven and the assemblies of men bless, and Who hath delivered us from the primal curse, O blessed Virgin.

Exapostilarion —

We see thee in the heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ God, O holy virgin; and desiring to enjoy the same beauty, we beseech thee with great compunction: Light thou our guttering lamp with the oil of thy good works, and help us to meet the Lord with the wise virgins, and to receive the goodly portion of those who stand at His right hand and glorify Him forever.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O animate bridal-chamber of God, all-pure Theotokos, I am not worthy of the bridal-chamber of thy Son and God; but I fall down before thee, O thou who art most good, and pray: By thine omnipotent and right-acceptable entreaties to Him cause me to enter into it.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Thy life was hidden in God, O Juliana, and thy virtues were concealed from the knowledge of man; yet Christ, the Judge of the contest, Whom thou didst faithfully serve in humility, silence and meekness of heart, after thy death glorified thee in the sight of all through wondrous incorruption and many miracles. For the Lord knoweth how to glorify openly His secret servants, who labor blamelessly for Him. Entreat Him, O favorite of God, that He grant our souls remission of sins and great mercy. *Twice*

By the radiant face of thine incorrupt body didst thou manifestly show forth the unfading splendor of thy soul when it was discovered in the bosom of the earth, O Juliana; for corruption did not dare to touch what had been united to Christ forever with an unbreakable bond. Him do thou beseech, O righteous virgin, that He grant unto our souls remission of sins and great mercy.

Thou didst righteously and blamelessly finish thine earthly life, O venerable princess, who lived most calmly in the world and in the years of thy youth attained the spiritual perfection to become like the angels in thy ways. Wherefore, thy holy soul now dwelleth with the angels, and thy virginal body hath been honored with incorruption and glorified by the Lord with miracles. Him do thou entreat, O blessed Juliana, that He grant unto our souls remission of sins and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Come, ye assemblies of the faithful! Come, ye choirs of virgins! Let us honor Princess Juliana, the righteous virgin, with hymns of praise, for she was well-pleasing to Christ in her youth, and like a young deer ran quickly to the mountain of heaven, to receive the reward for her virginal struggles from the just Judge of the contest Who rewardeth each according to his deeds. Wherefore, O brethren, let us emulate her purity and acquire her love for Christ God, that we may find Him merciful on the day of judgment.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All my hope do I set upon thee, O Mother of God. Keep me beneath the shelter of thy wings.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes: 8 troparia, from Odes III & VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Epistle to the Galatians, § 208 \[Gal. 3:23-29\]

Brethren: But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.

Alleluia, in Tone I —

*Stichos:* With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.

*Stichos:* And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of clay.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 104

\[Mt. 25: 1-13\]

The Lord said this parable: “The kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. Those who were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made: ‘Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.’ Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: ‘Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.’ But the wise answered, saying: ‘Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.’ And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ But he answered and said: ‘Verily I say unto you, I know you not.’ Watch therefore; for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

