The 10th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the 45 Holy Martyrs

of Nicopolis of Armenia

\(for this day we provide also the services in honor of the Deposition of the Robe of Our Lord Jesus,

and of our Holy Father Anthony of the Kiev Caves\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…” —

O most lauded martyrs, crushed by stones ye did not deny Christ the Rock, but, having won the victory by grace, ye rejoice with the choirs of the angels. Pray ye with them, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

O right victorious martyrs who were imprisoned together in dungeons, as preservers of the commandments of God; and tormented by thirst ye received dew from heaven, which cooled you spiritually. Wherefore, pray ye, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

O invincible martyrs, desiring the true life which ever endureth, rejoicing, ye endured an unjust death by the sword of the iniquitous; and now ye rejoice with the martyrs. Pray ye with them, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O most hymned Mistress, hope and confirmation of the faithful, our refuge and help, thee do we beseech: from every misfortune preserve thy servants who with faith worship thine Offspring. Him do thou entreat, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The ewe-lamb and immaculate Mistress, when she beheld her Lamb bereft of form and comeliness, said, lamenting: “Woe is me! Whither hath Thy beauty departed, O Thou Who art most sweet? Where is the radiant grace of Thine image, O my Son most beloved?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. Through their supplications save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely crowned regiment of martyrs”, in Tone V —

Ode I

*Irmos:* To God the Savior, Who led His people in the sea with dryshod feet and drowned Pharaoh and all his army, let us chant alone, for He is glorious.

With godly wisdom, O ye faithful, let us hymn the warriors and athletes of Christ as destroyers of deception and splendid conquerors, chanting unto God a hymn of victory, for He hath been glorified.

Struggling splendidly upon the earth, the athletes endured torments and have received crowns in the heavens, chanting together the hymn of victory: For He hath been glorified!

Bound together by faith and unity of soul, ye turned away from deception and were shown to be crowned victors, chanting together the hymn of victory: For He hath been glorified!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mother of God, unceasingly entreat God, Who became incarnate of thee, yet was not separated from the bosom of His Father, that from every evil circumstance He save those whom He hath fashioned.

Ode III

*Irmos:* By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, establish Thou my mind, that I may hymn and glorify Thy saving ascension.

Adorned with the understanding of Christ, O warriors, ye drowned the iniquitous foe in the outpourings of your blood.

Having given your bodies over to bitter and cruel tortures, O right laudable martyrs, through faith ye have received a divine inheritance.

Broken by the stones which were cast at you at the command of the tyrant, O athletes, with might ye preserved the dominion of the right Faith.

*Theotokion:* With the martyrs, O pure one, unceasingly entreat Him Who issued forth from thy womb, that He deliver those who hymn thee from the deception of the devil, O most immaculate one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

Crushed by stones, cut asunder by swords, burned with fire and cast into water, the valiant warriors of Christ, contending well, utterly drowned the wicked foe in the streams of their blood; and they were manifestly shown to be crowned. Wherefore, they are honored and faithfully glorified.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

He Who sitteth upon the throne of the cherubim and abideth in the bosom of the Father sitteth in thy womb as upon His holy throne, O Mistress; for, as God truly incarnate, He reigneth over all nations; and we now hymn Him with understanding. Him do thou entreat, that thy servants be saved.

Stavrotheotokion —

She who gave birth in the flesh unto Thee Who wast begotten in the beginning by the unoriginate Father, O Christ, when she saw thee hanging upon the Cross cried out: “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! How art Thou, O my Son, Who art glorified as God by the angels, now crucified by iniquitous men? I hymn thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of the power of the Cross, that paradise hath been opened thereby, and I cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Strengthened by the grace of the Savior, the choir of the athletes vanquished the God-hating enemy with the God-loving ways to which they cleaved.

O divinely summoned regiment of the athletes of Christ, ye conquered the multitude of the ungodly opponents of God, chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Beholding the light unapproachable while languishing in prison, the athletes destroyed the darkness of the falsehood of idolatrous polytheism, strengthened by the power of God.

*Theotokion:* The power of the Most High overshadowed thee, O Virgin, and made of thee a garden of paradise, which had in its midst the Tree of life, the Lord and Mediator.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Rising at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! for Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Nurtured by the words of the Holy Spirit, the martyrs abolished irrational idolatry.

The athletes were luminous stars and flowers of the Faith emitting sweet fragrance.

Ye were shown to be a field of the Most High, O saints, harvested by the scythe of torture, O most lauded ones.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, cease thou never to beseech Him Whom thou didst bear, that He save the souls of us who earnestly hymn thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The abyss engulfed me, and the sea monster became a tomb for me; yet I cried unto Thee Who lovest mankind, and Thy right hand saved me, O Lord.

In gladness the martyrs cried out: “Take Thou our souls into Thy hands, O Master Who lovest mankind, and grant them rest; for Thee alone, Who art greatly merciful, do we love!”

The choir of Thy martyrs came to share the habitations of the angels; for, having finished their race, they now pray that our souls be saved.

O divinely chosen choir of martyrs, ye glory of the martyrs, beauty of the martyrs, earnestly pray that all who have recourse to you may be saved.

*Theotokion:* What words can recount the wonder of thy seedless conception, O all-immaculate one? For Thou didst conceive God Who came for us in His loving-kindness.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As firstfruits…” —

For the sake of Christ, O martyrs, ye endured many torments. Ye set at nought all of idolatrous polytheism and destroyed all the ungodliness of every falsehood, trampling them down by the power of Christ. And ye teach us all to chant openly, with faith: Alleluia!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Blessed is the God of our fathers, Who saved the children who chanted unto Him in the fiery furnace.

In the furnace, O Christ, Thine athletes cried out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Illumined with the light of the Trinity, the athletes surrendered their souls with gladness, chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Standing before God with gladness, O crowned athletes, pray ye to Him in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* We entreat thee as our salvation, O Theotokos: beseech Him Who was incarnate of thee, in our behalf.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The Son and God, Who was begotten of the Father before the ages, and in latter times became incarnate of the Virgin Mother, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

The petition of us, the faithful, shall rest with the martyrs, and we shall share in their inheritance, hymning Christ and exalting Him supremely forever.

With heartfelt joy the choir of the steadfast athletes receiveth crowns from Christ in godly manner; it doth praise Him with splendor and exalt Him forever.

Stained with the streams of your blood, O right laudable ones, ye reign forever with Christ in the heavens, chanting with piety and exalting Him supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the cherubim, O pure Theotokos, having borne in thy womb Him Who sitteth upon them. With the incorporeal ones we of earth also glorify and exalt Him supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* With oneness of mind, we, the faithful, magnify thee, the Mother of God, who, in manner past understanding and recounting, ineffably gavest birth in time to the Timeless One.

O all-glorious martyrs, pray ye for the salvation of all, standing before Christ, for Whose sake ye endured tortures.

With mighty power ye brought down the fortress of deception, O invincible ones; and now ye have been counted worthy to dwell with the angels in the mansions of heaven.

Having vanquished the tyrant with the ways of lawful martyrdom, O most honorable ones, ye have received crowns of righteousness.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God, to Whom thou gavest birth! With the martyrs pray thou that remission of sins be given to those who hymn thee with faith.

