The 14th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Aquila

On this day the service of the holy martyrs Cyricus and Julitta is also chanted

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the apostle, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

The great Paul, the sun of the earth, shineth thee upon the world, O blessed and divinely wise one, like a radiant beam, to enlighten with the splendid effulgence of thy words those who of old languished in the night of ignorance.

Thy pure heart, O Aquila of godly eloquence, richly illumined by the brilliant rays of the divine Spirit, was shown to be truly luminous, and destroyed the cruel darkness of the heathen with the grace of God.

They who have recourse to thy divine temple and entreat thee therein with faith, O Aquila, are delivered from all manner of infirmities, from tribulations and sorrows, by thy sacred supplications and intercessions before God, O sacred one.

And 3 stichera for the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

With mature mind but a child’s body, O martyr Cyricus, thou didst put to shame the infantile tyrant with manly wisdom. Wherefore, grievously torturing thee at his tribunal, he imposed death upon thee who wast mindful of the life which groweth not old, into which thou hast entered, drenched forever with blood unstaunched.

O glorious Julitta, with spiritual outpourings thou didst bring forth Cyricus who sprang forth from thy womb like a fruitful vine, and is truly slain and trodden out in the tyrant’s wine-press. Pouring forth the wine of compunction with him, gladden the hearts of those who keep your memory with faith.

Having come close to wounds, O right wondrous one, thou didst likewise truly endure the convulsion of thy body; and beholding thy son’s end with thine own eyes, thou didst pass through a double torture, O Julitta. Wherefore, the Judge of the contest bestoweth twofold crowns upon thee, omnipotently granting the victory to those who contend.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Come ye all, and behold a sight strange and all-glorious! Who hath ever seen a child three years of age putting a tyrant to shame? O, the wonder! He drank of his mother’s milk and cried out to her who had nourished him: “Fear not the tortures of the cruel ruler of this world, O my mother, for Christ is the strength of those who believe on Him!”

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

The pure Virgin Mother, beholding the most iniquitous men nailing Thee unjustly to the Tree, was wounded in her womb, O Savior, as Symeon foretold.

At the aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VIII —

A child three years of age proclaimed the Trinity; he who was yet unweaned encouraged his own mother, saying: “Cease shedding thy tears, O my mother! The Creator is watching from on high and will save our souls!”

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you…” —

“I cannot bear to see Thee Who hast fallen asleep upon the Tree, O my Child, giving watchfulness unto all, that Thou mayest give divine and saving vigilance unto those who of old, through the fruit of disobedience, fell into the sleep of perdition!” said the Virgin, weeping, whom we magnify.

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy apostle Aquila, entreat the merciful God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto our souls.

Glory…, that of the martyrs, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the holy apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “We hymn the glorious Aquila with love”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

With hallowed songs let us hymn the sacred Aquila, and let us cry out: By his supplications save us all, O Compassionate One, in that Thou art good!

Thou didst splendidly make thyself wholly a habitation of the Spirit, O blessed one, made luminous by the splendid rays thereof; wherefore, thou hast brought light to those who are in darkness.

Fortifying thy mind with the law of Christ, thou didst cast down all the arrogance of the iniquitous, and having suffered, O divinely blessed one, thou didst demolish all the temples of the idols.

*Theotokion:* At thy word, O pure one, thou didst conceive in thy womb the Word Who by His word created all things; wherefore, with godly discourse we hymn thee, O divinely joyous one.

Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Cyricus and her who wisely gave him birth “, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

O ye who preached the Word Who is manifestly begotten of the Father and was incarnate of His Mother, ye became witnesses to His sufferings by your sufferings and death.

Like the luminous moon doth the glorious martyr join herself to, Cyricus, the sun who was born of her; and they have enlightened all creation with the rays of miracles.

Thou didst spurn transitory things, being in nowise moved, O martyr; and, bearing thy son in thine arms, with him thou didst cast into darkness the iniquitous and the deceit of the devil.

O glorious thy lineage, O martyr Julitta, by thy divers sufferings and tortures thou becamest the daughter of the immortal King.

*Theotokion:* Because of thee death was annulled and the sting of hell broken, O pure Mother; for thou gavest birth to the immortal Master Who died in the flesh.

Ode III

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

As a righteous man thou didst desire God, the one Master and King, and didst do His divine will with unwavering heart.

Suffering valiantly, O most sacred and all-lauded Aquila, thou didst cast down all the might of the evil one by the might of the worshipful and divine Spirit.

Contemplating the glory of the Lord with thy pure mind, O blessed one, thou didst partake wholly thereof, leaving behind transitory things for those things which are abiding.

*Theotokion:* The only Pure One, the one Lord, recognized thee alone as the most pure of all creation, O all-immaculate one, and became incarnate of thy pure blood.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Having broken the sling of the devil with the pangs of your suffering, O glorious martyrs, ye have been vouchsafed the mansions of heaven, splendid repose and everlasting glory.

Like a comely fledgling thou didst emulate the chaste dove, thy mother, O glorious Cyricus, opposing the false one who approached deceitfully and sought to seize thee, who art invincible.

The prideful serpent which set its mouth against heaven and boasted that it would destroy the earth did an innocent babe utterly cast down and destroy with the weapon of the Cross.

*Theotokion:* The transcendent Word Who brought all things into being without leaving the bosom of the Father made His abode within thy womb, O all-pure and all-immaculate one, and became flesh immutable, and hath deified man.

Kontakion of the apostle, in Tone IV —

Having acquired thee like a great sun, O glorious Aquila, apostle of the Lord, the Church enlighteneth with the splendors of thy teaching those who faithfully honor thee.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…” —

Illumining thy soul with the words of Paul, thou didst shine like the sun with the light of divine knowledge, O blessed Aquila; and thou didst plait for thyself a martyr’s wreath in accordance with the law. Wherefore, thou pourest forth rivers of healings upon those who with faith celebrate thy memory, O blessed one.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…” —

Having suffered with thy mother and completed the course of piety, O glorious athlete Cyricus, thou wast shown to be a preacher of Christ in accordance with thy name; and, having trampled down all the power of the enemy, thou hast become for us the courage of faith, and with thy mother hast received a crown from heaven. O glorious one, entreat Christ, that the souls of all who keep your memory may be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of the passions, I, who am devoid of conscience, call fervently upon thee, O pure one: Leave me not, a wretch, to perish utterly, O thou who gavest birth to the Abyss of loving-kindness, for I have none other hope than thee. Let not me, who have set my hope on thee, be a cause of joy and mockery for the enemy; for what thou desirest, thou canst do, in that thou art the Mother of the God of all.

Stavrotheotokion —

Seeing the Lamb Who was born of her without seed pierced by a spear on the Cross, the Virgin and ewe-lamb, wounded with darts of grief, exclaimed, crying out in pain: “What is this new mystery? How is it that Thou diest, Who alone art the Lord of life? Wherefore, do Thou arise, resurrecting man’s fallen forefather!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

They that slept the sleep of wicked impiety didst thou raise up to the light of piety, O Aquila.

Arming thyself with divine humility, thou didst cast down the prideful audacity of the enemy, O Aquila.

Blessedly didst thou suffer for Christ, shedding thy blood, as a priest and witness to His sufferings.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress Theotokos, we call thee the noetic palace and exalted throne of the King.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Though a child in body, yet didst thou with mature mind lay low the wickedness of the author and creator of evil, O martyr.

Like a fruitful vine, O martyr Julitta, thou didst put forth a cluster of grapes, the truly valiant Cyricus, who exudeth the sweetness of martyrdom.

As thou wast tenderly gazing, like a ewe-lamb, at thy martyred lamb, O right wondrous Julitta, thou wast cruelly put to the sword.

*Theotokion:* In thy birthgiving, O all-pure one, the laws of nature were supernaturally altered; for in manner past understanding and recounting thou gavest birth to the Creator.

Ode V

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Ever pouring forth the sweet discourse of piety, O all-wise and all-praised Aquila, as an initiate of the mysteries of Christ thou didst sweeten the souls of those who waxed gross on bitter deception.

Thy praises did the divinely eloquent Luke truly record, for thou wast a disciple of the sacred Paul and a divine guide, manifestly leading all to divine things.

Finding the honored preaching of the sacred Paul like a brilliant star shedding rays of splendor, thou didst receive from him words of brilliance and becamest light.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the Mother and handmaid of Christ Who became incarnate for our sake; Him do thou ever earnestly entreat, that He save us who call thee the pure Theotokos.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

When thy body was mangled and broken, O divinely wise one, thou didst shed the grossness of corruption; and thou wast clothed in another garment: the flesh in which the only-begotten Son of the Virgin clothed himself, deifying man.

Steadfastly courageous, thou wast stripped of thy body, O most glorious martyr, vanquishing carnal shame; and thou didst clothe in everlasting shame the enemy who of old stripped Eve naked, O Julitta.

When thy head was severed, thou didst crush the head of the serpent, O all-praised martyr; and, deprived of thy wealth, thou hast inherited the riches of heaven, receiving the immutable kingdom with all the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* In His loving-kindness, God, the Word of God, receiving noetic and animate flesh of thee, O all-pure one, became man and hath deified me who have been cast out because of my crimes. Him do thou beseech, that He save us all.

Ode VI

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Grace poured forth from thy lips, O blessed and sacred one. Wherefore, the Lord of all hath blessed thee forever, O divinely inspired Aquila.

Thine entreaty, O blessed God-bearer Aquila, is become deliverance from divers diseases and cleansing for sinful souls.

The journeys which thou didst make, directed toward the ways of God, were shown to be instruction and a path to salvation for the lost.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate sovereign Lady, who gavest birth to God, the Bestower of good things: From multifarious perils do thou save those who ever hymn thee.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Having sailed through the perilous waters of immeasurable tortures, O all-praised ones, ye manifestly reached the calm haven, having drowned the invisible Pharaoh in the streams of your blood.

The city of Iconium, which gave rise to thee, leapeth up, and Tarsus adorneth itself in thine honored memory, O Julitta; for with thy son thou didst accomplish thy martyrdom therein, and hast been vouchsafed crowns of victory.

Thou didst spurn the tortuous torments and wast shown to be a most comely dove, who with thy fledgling didst take wing and soared above all the snares of the serpent; and most wisely didst thou come to rest in the mansions of heaven, O most laudable one.

*Theotokion:* With the root-cutting scythe of thy prayer, O Maiden, cut down the wicked thoughts of my soul, and show it to be fruitful, I pray; for thou gavest birth unto the God and Savior of all.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast been shown…” —

Holding Cyricus in her embrace, Julitta, the martyr of Christ, cried out, exulting manfully in the contest: “Christ is the boast of the martyrs!”

*Ikos:* With the light of Thy commandments illumine my mind, O Christ, that I may hymn the saints and recount their struggles. What tongue is able to relate the sufferings which they endured? Wherefore, I fall down before Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind, praying: Grant remission to my wretched soul! Give me time to repent; for it is for this Thou didst of Thine own will take flesh, that Thou mightest lead all up to life. His athletes, accepting this, chant continually: Christ is the boast of the martyrs!

Ode VII

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Weaving a robe of incorruption for thyself with the divine Spirit, thou becamest wholly beautiful, O Aquila. And thou didst strip the enemy naked and clothe in splendid raiment and the light of salvation those who had been stripped naked by him.

As a godly priest of the mysteries, O divinely wise and right wondrous one, with the bread of thy words thou didst feed the people afflicted and held fast in noetic starvation, and didst make them partakers of the heavenly banquet.

They who have recourse to thy holy temple receive health; they find release from their sufferings and cleansing from their infirmities, hymning thee with love and crying out, O all-praised one: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* In the beginning death came to Adam through the food of corruption, O most immaculate one; but, having given birth unto our Life, O Virgin, thou didst bring Adam back to life. Wherefore, hymning thee as the cause of good things, we cry aloud: Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

The iniquitous one shattered thy body with staves, O divinely wise Julitta, yet in nowise shook the firmness of thine intention; for thou didst wield the Cross of Christ as a staff of power.

With the flow of the outpourings of their blood, the athletes of Christ quenched the fire of ungodliness, crying out fervently: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Bearing in thine arms him to whom thou hadst given birth, O martyr, thou didst appear at the tribunal and didst complete a good and twofold contest, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Following thy words, all of us, the generations of men, call thee blessed, O Maiden, who art shown to be the Mother of the blessed God Who hath made blessed those who believe on Him.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O Aquila, who art divinely deified, and as a disciple dwellest joyfully in the heavens with the disciples and servants of God and the eye-witnesses to the Word, be thou mindful of those who hymn thee with faith and love.

The streams of thy sweat pour forth rivers of divine miracles upon us all, O blessed one, and ever dry up the streams of the wicked passions, and drown the hordes of the deceiver.

Drawing nigh unto God with immaterial mind, thou becomest all light, ever deified by thine approach, having been released from the flesh; and thou seest what the angels see, O glorious Aquila, sacred martyr of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O pure and all-immaculate one, having conceived in thy womb God, the Cause of all, Who transcendeth every other cause, and having given birth unto Him Who became like unto us for our sake, entreat Him in behalf of those who hymn thee.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The luminous stars which inerrantly stud the firmament of the Church, enlightening the earth with wonders, are piously honored today by all who hymn Christ forever.

Bearing thine honored son like a new scion sprung forth from a root planted by God, O divinely wise one, thou hast caused gardens of impiety to wither up, crying out to Him and saying: Thee, O Christ, do we exalt supremely forever!

Like a most comely heifer, O Julitta, thou bearest the glorious Cyricus like a young calf, as a living sacrifice to the Lamb Who shone forth from the Virgin and was slaughtered in His extreme loving-kindness.

*Theotokion:* The Word incarnate of thine all-pure blood, O pure Maiden, hath by divine knowledge deified those who had plunged into the irrational carnal passions. Him do we exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Assembling, O Aquila, together we bless thee with sacred hymns, who wast the consecrated and precious vessel of the Word, a most wise preacher, a beacon for the world, and art the confirmation of our faith.

Knowing thee to be a disciple of Paul, an inerrant luminary of the world, a sacred martyr, a destroyer of the idols and an instructor in the knowledge of God, O divinely wise Aquila, we bless thee with pious thought.

Enlightening the world like the sun, thy most holy memory illumineth the souls of those who piously hymn thee. Thereon, O blessed one, pray that God grant cleansing of sins, peace profound and great mercy unto all.

*Theotokion:* The prophet foresaw thee as a radiant lamp bearing the Light Who shone forth from Light, O all-immaculate Virgin Mother, richly enlightening those who of old were benighted with the rays of His ineffable divinity.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

The shrine of the glorious athletes, overflowing with the grace of the divine Spirit, offereth healing. Come, draw forth and sanctify your souls, and be cleansed, O ye who love the martyrs, magnifying the Bestower of good things.

Like roses did ye spring forth in the valleys of the martyrs, O most blessed ones, like the sweet-smelling lily, like divine plants of paradise, truly exuding myrrh as an adornment; and ye have gladdened the souls of the faithful with mystic fragrance.

Ye were adorned with the wounds of martyrdom, O right victorious martyrs, and, manifestly emulating the angels, ye stand before God, splendidly invested with the wreath of victory, asking cleansing from sins for those who honor you.

The martyr, like a ewe-lamb, bearing her son like a lamb, passed unharmed in the midst of wolves, and hath made her abode in the fold of heaven. By their prayers, O Lord, ever save us who honor their sacred memory.

*Theotokion:* O portal of the Light, illumine my soul, which hath been blinded by the passions and benighted and vexed by evil thoughts; and rescue me from temptations, tribulations and sorrows, that I may glorify thee, the hope and confirmation of the faithful.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; Glory…: that of the martyrs: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

Rejoice, adorn thyself and dance, keeping splendid festival, O city of Iconium! For from thee have two all-wise luminaries shone forth: the glorious Julitta and the divinely wise Cyricus. For, having struggled lawfully, they have received the wreath of victory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

We hymn thee, the Mother and Virgin, O most immaculate one; for in thy womb thou didst bear the God of all; and professing His unity to be immutable as to hypostasis, we who are saved because of thee, confess thee to be the Theotokos and Mistress.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, idiomela, the composition of Germanus —

*In Tone I:* The valiant athlete and preacher of the Faith, with his divinely wise mother, do we praise as is meet; for, having suffered steadfastly, they manfully cast down the enemy, the author of evil, by the power of the Cross. Wherefore, they have received crowns from God, the Judge of the contest, and entreat Him unceasingly with boldness, that He save those who with faith celebrate their sacred contest. *Twice*

*In Tone II:* O martyr Cyricus, who from thine infancy wast full of grace, possessing a mature understanding. In the victory of thy struggles pray thou to Christ God with thy mother, that He grant peace to the world, in that thou art a great confessor of the Trinity.

Thou wast shown to be a child among martyrs, yet didst show thyself to be mature in understanding. Since thou didst accept the Word Who is without beginning, thou wast not afraid of the fire of the iniquitous. With thy mother, entreat the Creator, that He save our souls, in that He is the Savior.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in the same tone —

Come, O ye faithful, and, having assembled, let us with praises crown the two most holy martyrs, who upheld the worship of the Trinity; for with their own feet they trampled down the deception of idolatry and the designs of the tyrants. Praising them, O ye faithful, let us cry out, saying: Rejoice, O most honorable Julitta who, putting aside thy womanly weakness, didst struggle manfully! Rejoice, O most blessed Cyricus who, though but three years of age, didst cast down the most artful enemy! Rejoice, ye boast and glory of us who with faith celebrate your sacred suffering! Therewith do we pray: Ever entreat the Lord of all, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

She who knew not wedlock, beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross, O Jesus, said, weeping: “O sweet Child, wherefore hast Thou abandoned me who alone gave Thee birth, O unapproachable Light of the all-unoriginate Father? Haste Thou, and glorify Thyself, that they who glorify Thy divine sufferings may receive divine glory!”

At the aposticha, Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV —

Rejoice, adorn thyself and make merry, O city of Iconium, for from thee a glorious fruit hath sprung forth, the all-comely Julitta, the right victorious martyr, and from her came forth the rightly named and honored child Cyricus. For, having manfully trampled down the wiles of the tyrannous enemy, they have rightly received crowns of victory, exhorting the people to honor and worship the all-holy Trinity. Wherefore, with boldness we cry out to Christ our God Who glorified them, that He bring peace to the world and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

As she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee maternally: “O my Son most desired! How is it that Thou hast been suspended upon a Tree, O Long-suffering One? How is it that Thy hands and feet have been pierced by nails by the iniquitous, O Word? How is it that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the martyrs.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §154

from the midpoint \[I Cor. 13: 11-14: 5\]

Brethren: When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love. Follow after love, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy. For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries. But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the Church. I would that ye all spake with tongues but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.

Alleluia, in Tone VII —

*Stichos:* Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise.

Gospel according to Luke, §51,

from the midpoint \[Lk 10:19-21\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said: “I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.”

Communion Verse —

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

