The 15th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Prince

Vladimir the Great, Equal of the Apostles

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

Strengthened by the right hand of the Most High, O great Prince Vladimir, thou didst spurn the falsehood of idolatry, and, enlightened with holy baptism, O glorious one, thou hast illumined the land of Russia with the light of the knowledge of Christ. *Twice*

Come, ye people of Russia, let us praise our leader in Christian piety, the ever-glorious prince Vladimir the great, who trampled the idols underfoot and hath enlightened the land of Russia with holy baptism.

Thy radiant memorial hath shone forth upon us today most joyously, O equal of the apostles, gladdening men’s souls and hearts with the beauty of divine knowledge, O great Prince Vladimir.

Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone VI —

Today the land of Russia, having acquired thee like a new Emperor Constantine, doth join in splendid chorus, O great Prince Vladimir, celebrating thy memory with joy. And we, thy children, cry out to thee in supplication: Pray to the Lord, O equal of the apostles, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

No one who hath recourse to thee departeth from thee ashamed, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos; but he asketh grace and receiveth a gift, in fulfillment of his profitable petition.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…” —

Rejoicing, thou didst pass over from earth to heaven, O great Prince Vladimir, and hast received honor from Christ God. To Him do thou pray, that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* I have raised up one chosen out of My people.

Illumined with the rays of divine knowledge, thou didst trample the idols underfoot, O equal of the apostles, and didst plant the Christian Faith in thy native land.

*Stichos:* With My holy oil have I anointed him.

Protect thou thy flock, which thou didst lead to the knowledge of Christ, O great Prince Vladimir, and ever preserve in peace the Russian realm.

Glory…, Now & ever…: idiomelon, in Tone VIII —

Come, let us rejoice today, hymning the all-pure Virgin Theotokos, the helper of our race, to whom the great Prince Vladimir raised up a most honored church, giving to it a tithe of his own possessions. Emulating him, we offer her hymns of praise instead of tithes, crying out and saying: O palace of the Word and splendid bridal-chamber of the King of all, vouchsafe thy protection unto us, the lowly, and be thou our aid, unto the salvation of our souls.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

In word and deed thou wast a second Constantine; for he was born in a Christian age, yet remained a pagan for many years, while thou wast born among pagans, yet camest to love Christ Who loved thee, and to Him thou hast ascended, rejoicing. Cease thou never to entreat Him in behalf of those who honor thy memory. *Twice*

Mount Sinai is glad, shining eternally with splendor, having been sanctified by the law of Moses and seen the Invisible One; and thy great city, O Vladimir, rejoiceth and is glad, shining with splendor, beholding in itself, and not in darkness, the Son Who is glorified with the Father in the Spirit. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

Spiritually thou wast the father, and materially thou wast the king of the Russian people, O Vladimir; and as a true preacher, an apostle of Christ, thou didst proclaim the baptism of salvation. And splendidly illumining all therewith, thou didst sanctify the people in all the lands of thy kingdom, O blessed one.

Thou wast a root of the Orthodox Faith, O Vladimir, watered by the All-holy Spirit, putting forth for us divinely planted branches which emit the sweet fragrance of flowers: the wondrous Boris and Gleb, the lovers of piety, who pour forth miracles in abundance upon all the faithful. Standing with them before Christ, pray thou, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Come, let us all hasten to the honored memorial of the father of Russia, Vladimir, our leader; for he was born of the heathen, but came to love Christ Who loved him, and to Him hath he now gone up, rejoicing, with his grandmother Olga. For he taught all his people to believe in and worship the one God in Trinity, and, destroying the idols, he trampled them underfoot, and produced for us his precious offspring, Boris and Gleb. Wherefore, faithfully honoring their memory with hymns and splendor, we celebrate with love, that they may pray for us to the Lord, grant victory to the faithful over the pagan foe, bring peace to the whole world, and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Third Book of Kings

Solomon stood up in front of the altar before all the congregation of Israel; and he spread out his hands toward heaven: and he said: “O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like Thee in heaven above and on the earth beneath. If the heaven and the heaven of heavens will not suffice Thee, how much less even this house which I have built to Thy name? Yet, O Lord God of Israel, Thou shalt look upon my petition, to hear the prayer which Thy servant doth pray to Thee in Thy presence this day, that Thine eyes may be open to this house day and night, even toward the place of which Thou didst say: ‘My name shall be there, to hear the prayer which My servant prayeth at this place day and night.’ And Thou shalt hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, which they shall pray toward this place; and Thou shalt hear in Thy dwelling-place in heaven, and Thou shalt do and be gracious.”

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

\[Is. 61: 10-62: 5\]

Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me with the robe of salvation, and the garment of joy: He hath put a crown on me as on a bridegroom, and adorned me with ornaments as a bride. And as the earth putting forth her flowers, and as a garden its seed, so shall the Lord, even the Lord, cause righteousness to spring forth, and exultation before all nations. For Sion’s sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go forth as light, and My salvation burn as a torch. And the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy glory: and one shall call thee by a new name, which the Lord shall name. And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. And thou shalt no more be called Forsaken; and thy land shall no more be called Desert: for thou shalt be called My Pleasure, and the land Inhabited: for the Lord hath taken pleasure in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited. And as a young man liveth with a virgin, so shall thy sons dwell in thee: and it shall come to pass that as a bridegroom will rejoice over a bride, so will the Lord rejoice over thee.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

\[Is. 60: 1-14\]

Be enlightened, be enlightened, O Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and there shall be gross darkness on the nations: but the Lord shall appear upon thee, and His glory shall be seen upon thee. And kings shall walk in thy light, and nations in thy brightness. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold thy children gathered: all thy sons have come from afar, and thy daughters shall be borne on men’s shoulders. Then shalt thou see, and fear, and be amazed in thine heart; for the wealth of the sea shall come round to thee, and of nations and peoples; and herds of camels shall come to thee, and the camels of Madiam and Gæpha shall cover thee: all from Saba shall come bearing gold, and shall bring frankincense, and they shall publish the salvation of the Lord. And all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered, and the rams of Nabæoth shall come; and acceptable sacrifices shall be offered on My altar, and My house of prayer shall be glorified. Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with young ones to Me? The isles have waited for Me, and the ships of Tharsis among the first, to bring thy children from afar, and their silver and their gold with them, and that for the sake of the holy name of the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is glorified. And strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall wait upon thee: for by reason of My wrath I smote thee, and by reason of mercy I loved thee. And thy gates shall be opened continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring in to thee the power of the gentiles, and their kings as captives. For the nations and the kings which will not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be made utterly desolate. And the glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, with the cypress, and pine, and cedar together, to glorify my holy place. And the sons of those who afflicted thee, and of those who provoked thee, shall come to thee in fear; and thou shalt be called Sion, the city of the Holy One of Israel. Because thou hast become desolate and hated, and there was no helper, therefore I will make thee a perpetual gladness, a joy of many generations. And thou shalt suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt eat the wealth of kings: and shalt know that I am the Lord Who saveth and delivereth thee, the Holy One of Israel.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple; and this sticheron of the saint, in Tone II —

Today the memory of the pious Prince Vladimir hath shone, poured forth like myrrh; for, having loved Christ and triumphed over the idols, he built churches in his land to Him Who was crucified for our sake, and hath received a crown and kingdom in the heavens.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Come ye, let us all hasten with faith to the honored memorial of the father of Russia, Vladimir, our guide; for, lo! he was born to the heathens, but came to love Christ Who loved him; and unto Him he hath ascended, rejoicing, with his grandmother Olga. Wherefore, we also celebrate with love, entreating him to pray to the Lord for us, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O all-glorious wonder! The vaunted mind is cast into the depths today, and all the armies of evil lament, beholding a most wild shoot divinely planted and glorified by the power of God, and crowned by God with splendor: Vladimir the great, our faithful leader.

*Stichos:* I have raised up one chosen out of My people.

Wondrous is the abyss of miracles! For those who before were hardened in mind and raged in vain, are gladdened today in the honored Church by the face of Vladimir; and Christ God doth reign, having acquired him as He did Paul of old, and in His land hath set him as a faithful prince, who hath enlightened his people with honorable baptism.

*Stichos:* With My holy oil have I anointed him.

Rejoice, O boast of Russia! Rejoice, O helmsman of the faithful! Rejoice, O godly Vladimir, our leader! Rejoice, bulwark of the Faith! Rejoice, all-glorious wonder of wonders, calm haven of those who have recourse to thee! Rejoice, most holy root of the Faith and intercessor for those who hymn thee and magnify thee with faith!

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Assembling today, O ye councils of Russia, let us laud Vladimir the Great, the author of piety and preacher of the Faith, supreme among the princes of Russia, the peer of the apostles; and with praises and spiritual hymns let us crown him, saying: Rejoice, O all-valiant warrior of Christ, for, having utterly destroyed the tyrannous enemy and delivered us from his deceit, thou hast led us to the King, Christ our God. O all-blessed and most lauded one, beseech Him to grant peace and health, steadfast might and victory over the heathen to thy people, and great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Seated on the high throne of Kiev, the mother of cities saved by God, thou didst emulate the merchant who sought the goodly pearl, O Vladimir glorious in might; and examining and sending emissaries to the Imperial City to learn about the Orthodox Faith, thou didst find Christ, the priceless Pearl, Who chose thee as a second Paul and in the holy font removed thy blindness, spiritual and bodily. Wherefore, we, thy people, celebrate thy repose. Pray thou, that Russia, thy land, may be saved, and that peace and great mercy may be granted to the Orthodox people.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I —

O blessed Prince Vladimir, equal of the apostles, we cry out to thee as to the author and root of the Faith and the destroyer of the idols: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

To the path of repentance guide us who have ever strayed into the trackless wastes of evil and have angered the all-good Lord, O blessed Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place of God.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

Taught ineffable heavenly wisdom by God, thou didst richly attain an understanding of His Faith and didst quickly hasten to His beauty. Wherefore, thou didst illumine the eyes of thy mind and didst lift thyself up to an understanding of the pious Faith. For which cause, we say in celebration: Blessed is God Who illumined thy heart with the light of knowledge, O radiant luminary Vladimir! Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The gloom of sin doth cover me, as do the shameful works which I have constantly committed, without restraint; and the oppression of my conscience tormenteth me. Woe is me! Where now shall I hide myself? To whom shall I flee to find help again? Before thee alone do I fall down, O Mother of God, and I entreat thee: Pray thou continually, that our souls be saved!

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy Prince Vladimir, equal of the apostles, and we honor the holy memory of thee who trampled the idols underfoot and hast enlightened the whole land of Russia with holy baptism.

Selected Psalm verses —

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Thou didst acquire speedy and steadfast zeal for the true Faith of Christ; and having found the spiritual font of the mind of God, thou didst quickly hasten with love, and, washing away the defilement of transgressions, thou didst likewise sanctify thy people. Pray thou to God, that our souls be saved!

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in the same tone —

Go thou quickly in advance, O prince, thou guide of the faithful and favorite of God; for our enemies mock us and cause us to stumble. By thy faith destroy those who make war upon us, that they also may learn to glorify thy memory; and save us who hymn thee from all wrath.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Virgin Theotokos, who alone art pure, alone art blessed, we have come to know the Word of the Father, Christ our God, Who became incarnate of thee; wherefore, hymning thee without ceasing, we magnify thee.

Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

I have raised up one chosen out of My people.

*Stichos:* For My hand shall be unto Him an ally.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Reading from the Gospel according to

St. John §36 \[10:9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VIII —

Assembling, let us praise Vladimir, the emulator of the apostles, our all-blessed father and teacher, through whom we have come to know Christ God. Drawing nigh unto the Light out of the darkness, let us illumine our eyes and hearts, and joining chorus on the day of his memorial, let us be glad together, having found in him an Orthodox guide to the kingdom of heaven.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[The Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

O Word Who art also without beginning, the Creator of the four elements of old, Who by them hast bound together the whole world: Loose thou my soul, which hath been bound by the passions, that, joining chorus, I may hymn the glorious Prince Vladimir. *Twice*

O Master Who from the heavens descended immaterially upon the spiritual mountain: send down abundant radiance from on high upon the souls of us who make supplication, that we may praise the wondrous Prince Vladimir as is meet.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, thou art the boast of mothers and virgins, who gavest birth to Life and the Creator of the world, yet didst not experience the pain of childbirth; and though thou art a mother, thou hast remained a virgin. Wherefore, praising thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!

Canon II, in Tone VI —

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Come, ye faithful, let us give utterance to a spiritual hymn, and let us glorify Christ Who hath splendidly glorified the honored Vladimir, the great prince.

O Benefactor Who givest seed to the sower, grant me discourse, loosing the bonds of my tongue; and renew me, O Savior, that I may glorify Thee with faith.

O Thou Who callest all to thee, not by force, but willingly: As of old Thou didst call Moses and Elijah, so now hast Thou spoken in the heart of the faithful and right laudable prince.

*Theotokion:* Adorned with the beauty of the virtues, O pure Mother of God, thou didst conceive the true God Who hath enlightened us with divine virtues.

Katavasia: I will open my mouth…

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord; my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies. I am glad in Thy salvation.

Like a clarion of godly tone thy spiritual tongue sounded forth, O blessed one, announcing to all the ends of the Russian land the baptism of Christ’s Orthodox Faith. And illumined thereby, thou hast enlightened the whole world. *Twice*

Thine all-glorious memory shineth forth today, and our Orthodox hierarchs, and all the Christian people whom thou didst lead to the noetic Light, celebrate it, praising thee as their forefather.

*Theotokion:* The shadow of the law passed away because of thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, when came the grace of Christ our God, the Word of the Father. And the glorious prince, acknowledging Him, hath splendidly adorned thy church.

Canon II

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

O Merciful One, Who enlightened Paul and made him Thine elect, by Thy baptism Thou hast now also dispelled the ocular affliction of Vladimir, the father of Russia.

Thou hast shown thyself to be an emulator of the faithful Constantine, receiving Christ in thy heart; and like an apostle thou hast taught the whole land of Russia His commandments.

Aided by the power of God, thou didst topple the ungodly Perun, the vile abode of the demons, and binding him to a horse’s tail, thou didst command thy soldiers to beat him.

*Theotokion:* The great Prince Vladimir, the vessel of God and emulator of the Apostle Paul, found the Virgin Mary to be a holy tabernacle and erected this divine church to her name.

Sessional hymn, in Tone II —

Ever keeping vigil in prayer with joyous soul, O Vladimir, thou didst therefore draw forth the wisdom of the Spirit from the wellspring which cometh down from on high. Wherefore, shining like the sun with faith, and praying unceasingly to Christ, haste thou with all speed, O compassionate one, to save the world from transgressions. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O pure Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, who gavest birth without seed to the Master of all: Entreat Him with the angels, that we may be delivered from all perplexity, and that He grant compunction and light to our souls, and cleansing of the offenses, in that thou alone dost quickly help.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming, O Lord; wherefore he cried aloud: “God shall come out of Thæman!” Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

Radiant and sweet is the sun of heaven after it hath been covered by a cloud; and gladsome and joyous is the spring after the sorrow of winter. And thou, O Vladimir, hath through baptism shone forth upon us like the radiant sun after the cloud of the gloom of idolatry. *Twice*

On the road to Damascus, Saul the Pharisee was struck blind by a small measure of the radiance of the great Light, but his sight was restored in baptism; and thou hast become his emulator, O glorious one, who, having travelled to Korsun, didst dispel the darkness from thine eyes.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou hast been shown to be an unwatered root putting forth our deliverance in giving birth to Christ our God, the radiant Fruit. Illumine my soul, which hath been enshrouded in gloom by the passions, and ask for me remission of sins.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Christ the Master performeth an awesome, all-glorious and ineffable miracle; for he restoreth the whole Russian land through baptism and illumineth Prince Vladimir.

Come ye with splendor! Ye children of Russia, lift up your voices, as is meet, to Vladimir our father, and let us all radiantly celebrate his memorial with faith.

Thou didst drive out the ungodliness of thy father and didst love the Orthodox Faith of thy most honored grandmother, O great Prince Vladimir, equal of the apostles of Christ.

*Theotokion:* We bless thee, the Virgin, as the gate which giveth divine entry to the radiant garden of paradise, as the noetic place of sanctuary, as the beauty of Jacob.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* Grant us peace, O Lord our God. O Lord our God, take us for Thy possession. O Lord, we know none other than Thee; we call upon Thy name.

Rejoice and adorn thyself in spirit, O great Prince Vladimir; for thou hast offered to Christ thine excellent and divinely planted scions, thy fruit of godly excellence: the glorious Boris and the pious Gleb. And, standing with them before Christ, pray thou in our behalf. *Twice*

Isaiah foretold wondrous things for Jerusalem: it shall manifestly be the mountain of God and His dwelling-place above the mountains. And we have rightly understood the grace of the Spirit which is upon thee, for thou didst build a house for the Master on the summit of a mountain.

*Theotokion:* In the Spirit Isaiah proclaimed wondrous things concerning thee who, though a virgin, wouldst give birth to Christ without seed. And David, thine ancestor, wondrously proclaimed thy mighty works; for Christ hath saved us, in that He is merciful.

Canon II

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Today the angels of God rejoice in splendor in the heavens, on the day of thy holy commemoration; for thou hast saved us from all evil and hast delivered many people, and the whole land of Russia, from sacrificing to demons.

The multitude and dark assembly of the demons lamenteth, beholding the idols overturned, which had been raised up for the destruction of men, for thou didst topple them in accordance with God’s commands, O Vladimir.

Rejoice and be glad, O servant of Christ, great and wise prince, intercessor for our souls; for through thee have we all be delivered from the demons’ deceit. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice!

*Theotokion:* Shining from afar in purity, thou wast the divine habitation of the Master, O most hymned one; for thou alone hast been shown to be the Mother of God, who bore Him in thine arms as a babe.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Like the waters of the sea am I tossed about by the waves of life, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, like Jonah I cry to Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord!

Thou wast an emulator of the piety of the glorious Emperor Constantine who enlightened the Greek nations with baptism, O Vladimir; for thou didst all-gloriously renew thy people with the laver of the Spirit. *Twice*

Having sweetened thy soul with the love of Christ and received noetic wings, thou didst soar far above the darkness of the idols and didst drive away the gloom of false belief, O blessed one, making thine abode in the bridal-chamber of God, the Savior of all.

*Theotokion:* The Orthodox hierarchy and right-believing people of Russia are of good cheer today on the all-radiant memorial of Vladimir, blessing thy seedless birthgiving, O Virgin; and, earnestly entreating thy Son, they cry out: Thee do we magnify!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

By the power of God have Satan, the destroyer of souls, and his false sacrifices been trampled underfoot; for unto us hath Christ shown the faithful Prince Vladimir to be a model of one who doth crush and dash him down beneath our feet.

Of old the Lord saved Israel from slavery by the hand of Moses; and now He hath likewise saved us all from the falsehood of idolatry by the hand of Vladimir, the faithful prince.

As is meet, we all call upon thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, O most honored and all-blessed one! For we have thee as our deliverer with God, O Vladimir. Disdain not thy servants, but ever preserve us.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure and all-hymned Virgin, through thee we have found salvation. Our God, Whom the angels in the heavens desire to see, hath now become a visible infant in thy womb.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII —

Emulating the great Apostle Paul in thy maturity, O most glorious Vladimir, and putting aside all thy zeal for idols as childish thoughts, thou hast adorned thyself with the purple robe of divine baptism. And standing now in gladness before Christ the Savior, pray thou that Russia, thy land, be saved, and that peace and great mercy be granted to the Orthodox people.

*Ikos:* O Christ God Who of old enlightened Israel with the law of Moses, Thou hast illumined the world by the advent of Thy coming, and hast sent Thy divinely eloquent disciples to preach throughout all lands Thy seedless nativity from the Virgin; and thou didst command them to baptize in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. And seeing the Russian land grown old in sin, thou didst send forth Thy Spirit to the soul of the glorious Vladimir, mighty of mind, that He might acknowledge thee, Christ God, as One of the Trinity, and by Thy baptism might enlighten Thy chosen people, those entrusted by Thee to him, and lead to thee those who cry out with faith: Deliver Thine inheritance from the pagan enemy!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* Quenching the most pernicious power of the Chaldæan furnace, the youths cried out to the Creator, Who had descended in the guise of an Angel: Blessed and praised art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The enemy, the destroyer of souls, stripped me of the divinely woven raiment of my forefathers; but Jesus the One Who is without beginning, Who appeared in the flesh, cleansing me with the water of the Spirit, hath granted it to me again. And acknowledging Him, O glorious Vladimir, thou criest out in gladness: Blessed is the God of our fathers! *Twice*

Having kept the law of Moses, Daniel was vouchsafed divine vision; and thou, having trampled the idols of thy forebears underfoot, hast beheld Christ noetically with the Father and the Spirit, not in darkness, but in the greatest glory; and, illumined by baptism, thou criest out in gladness: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Having deceived the first-created ancestor, O Virgin, the enemy stripped him of his divine garment; but my sweet Jesus, Who issued forth from thy pure womb which knew not wedlock, hath saved him. And the evil one, hurling himself against God as against Adam, hath wounded and wrought himself grievous injury. But we cry out to thy Son: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

As the grandson of the all-blessed Olga, thou wast confirmed by the love of that new Helena; and thou didst show thyself to be a new Constantine the Great, O Vladimir, crying out to Christ: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The cruel deceiver prompted thee to make war on Christians, but the all-great Lord illumined thee at Korsun, vouchsafed thee divine baptism, and hath bestowed upon thee the kingdom of heaven.

As a great disciple of Christ thou didst drive out the age-old falsehood of the demons, and renewing all of us, thou hast enlightened us to cry out without ceasing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Before time began the preëternal God chose thee from among all generations, and, receiving flesh from thee in latter days, He revealed Himself as perfect God and man, O Ever-virgin.

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who coverest Thy chambers with waters and settest the sands as a bound for the sea: Thee doth the sun hymn; Thee doth the moon glorify; and unto Thee doth all creation offer a hymn forever, as to the Creator of all.

The generation of the righteous is blessed, declared the divine mouth, and this hath been fulfilled in thee, O blessed one; for thou hast brought hallowed and divinely chosen seed to Christ: the invincible martyrs by whom thou hast enlightened the Russian land. And praising them with thee, we exalt Christ supremely forever. *Twice*

The city of Kiev hath truly been shown to be the mother of all the cities of thy kingdom, for therein Christ was first glorified with the Father and the Spirit by thy grandmother and thee, O blessed one, and there thy valorous body lay in splendor in the church of our Mistress. And we, thy people, praising thee, hymn Christ forever.

*Theotokion:* The voices of the prophets truly proclaimed Emmanuel, the Father’s Effulgence and Word Who is without beginning, Who would be born of thee without corruption: God and man, the mighty expectation of the nations. Him do thou now entreat, O Mother, that we be saved.

Canon II

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Thou hast delivered us from all the idols of the ungodly and hast led us to Christ, O father of faithful princes, teacher of thy flock, who hymn Christ forever.

Thou hast been proclaimed to be a new Constantine for all the land of Russia, O blessed Vladimir; for thou hast made luminous the name of Christ, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

Thou standest now before the eternal King and hast been crowned by His right hand. Pray thou to Him for thine unworthy servants, that we may hymn and supremely exalt Him forever.

*Theotokion:* Thou art the cloud of the Word, O all-hymned one, the lamp of the Sun, the priceless chariot, the exaltation of virgins, the rich and curdled mountain, and thou remainest all-pure, O lordly Virgin.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Of old David was found to be the mighty king of Israel, and he saved the people; and, casting down the gods of other nations, he proclaimed the Son of God through the Spirit. And thou didst acknowledge God in Trinity, O blessed Vladimir. Him do we magnify. *Twice*

Let the chosen people of God celebrate thy memory today with gladness and sanctity in the church of the Mother of God which thou didst lovingly adorn as an earthly heaven, as an everlasting memorial of thy passing; for, resting therein, thou dost await the most awe-inspiring trumpets of the archangels, O blessed one. Wherefore, we ever magnify thee.

*Theotokion:* All of us, the generations of men, set afire by the divine Spirit, bless thee with love, O Theotokos; for thou hast annulled the curse of our first mother. And we earnestly hymn God the Word, for, having received Him in thy womb without being consumed, thou gavest birth to Him in the flesh. To Him do thou now pray, that thy faithful flock be delivered from all want and grief.

Canon II

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Thou art like a sweet date-palm lofty of stature, like a flourishing olive-tree, putting forth most fruitful branches, like a grape-vine giving rise to two scions, the honored martyrs Boris and Gleb.

Choirs of noble princes now stand before thee, bearing the piety received from thee, and praising thee with the faithful people, crying: O speedy guide and helper, be thou mindful of us, that we may find life in peace through thee!

Come, ye people of Russia, let us come together in the honored church of the holy Vladimir, the all-blessed great prince, the all-glorious favorite of Christ, who was named Basil in baptism; and let us receive life and salvation, grace and great mercy.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou gavest birth to God on earth: the Incorporeal One came into union with the flesh, in a single hypostasis, yet in two natures, that He might save us all who with faith bow down before thee as the all-pure Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

With thy glorious grandmother Olga, thou wast truly shown to be a beacon enlightening the whole world with piety and faith, O Vladimir, who art crowned by God. And we glorify Christ Who loved you, and is wondrous in His saints. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-immaculate one, thou didst ineffably give birth to God in two wills and natures, yet in a single hypostasis, Who for our sake abased Himself of His own will, even to accepting crucifixion, and hath given us divine riches, O Virgin Mother of God.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

O Lord, Thou gavest Thy Cross to our prince as a mighty weapon, whereby He lived righteously on earth, and, shining forth with piety, hath been vouchsafed the kingdom of heaven by Thy loving-kindness. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls. *Twice*

As the King of kings and Lord of all lords, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Thou gavest to Thy pious favorite the wisdom of Solomon, the meekness of David and the Orthodoxy of the apostles. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

O ever-memorable prince, thou wast the first to receive the purple robe by the will of Christ, having acknowledged Him as the King and Benefactor of all, Who granteth victories to every ruler, and authority to those who deserve it. Wherefore, unto thee did Jesus the Savior of our souls, Who loveth mankind, entrusted the kingship unto thee.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Thou didst receive thy calling, not from men, but, like the wondrous Paul, didst receive it from Christ God on high, O glorious apostle Vladimir. For, protected by the sign of the Cross, and hunted down by it like all-comely prey, thou by it wast shown to be an invincible victor over enemies visible and invisible. Wherefore, we mortals entreat thee as an intercessor, honoring thy memory as is meet, that with boldness thou mayest ask for us enlightenment, cleansing and great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the saint; and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone III —

O chant unto our God, chant ye; chant unto our King, chant ye.

*Stichos:* Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of rejoicing.

Epistle to the Galatians, §200 \[1:11-19\]

Brethren: I make known to you, that the Gospel which was preached by me is not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews’ religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: and profited in the Jews’ religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother’s womb, and called me by His grace, to reveal His Son in me, that I might preach Him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood: neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* I have raised up one chosen out of My people.

*Stichos:* For My hand shall be unto Him an ally.

Gospel according to John, §35,

from the midpoint \[10: 1-9\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All who ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

