The 18th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Emilian

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

The religion of the Greeks didst thou grind fine as dust, and through the grace of Christ our God, O martyr Emilian, thou didst erect an animate tower of divine knowledge, a temple of sanctity, and an immovable foundation of piety for those who with godly wisdom honor thy valiant feats, O thou who art most rich.

Though devoured by the fire, afflicted with wounds, imprisoned in dungeons, and subjected to manifold tribulations, O glorious one, thou didst not sacrifice to the idols, nor didst thou deny Christ, but didst remain invincible. Wherefore, the Master, as the good Judge of the contest, the immutable King, hath bestowed upon thee the crown of victory.

With thy blood didst thou dye thy robe, and, arrayed therewith, thou hast entered the kingdom on high, rejoicing, O glorious one; and thou standest forever before God, the King of all, asking for peace, health and speedy deliverance from evils for those who honor thee with faith.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody —

With outpourings of the all-holy Spirit bedew my mind, O all-pure one, who ineffably gavest birth unto Christ, the Drop Who by His compassion washeth away the immeasurable iniquities of men; and dry up the wellspring of my passions, and by thy supplications ever vouchsafe unto me a torrent of living sustenance.

Stavrotheotokion —

When she beheld Thee, O Lord, nailed to the Cross, the ewe-lamb, Thy mother, marvelled and said: “What is this sight which I behold, O my Son most desired? Hast Thou thus been rewarded by the iniquitous and unbelieving assembly which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? Yet, glory, O Master, to Thine ineffable condescension!”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Emilian received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Gloriously do I hymn the martyr Emilian”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Let us praise today our God Who is over all things, and let us also praise His martyr, who contended lawfully and won the crown of victory with the power of the Spirit.

Arrayed in the power and grace of Him Who clothed Himself in our weakness, O glorious and divinely blessed martyr, thou didst strip bare the vainglorious arrogance of the weakness of idolatry.

Rejoicing, O glorious one, thou didst proclaim the triple Unity united in a single essence, and didst destroy the falsehood of polytheism, suffering steadfastly, O divinely blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Christ the Lord, to Whom thou gavest birth, O most immaculate one, is my strength and song and the enlightenment of my heart, and He is known to exist in two natures and in a single hypostasis.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

The law of our God was truly a lamp to thy feet and a light for thy steps, and thereby, as one adorned as a martyr, thou didst cause the steps of the iniquitous to falter.

Thou didst direct the workings of thy mind toward the will of God, the calm haven, O wise one, and didst flee the raging sea of polytheism, the wickedness of the demons.

The hosts of heaven wondered at the divine sufferings of Emilian and his faith and courage even unto death, how in the flesh he cast down the incorporeal one, humbling him.

*Theotokion:* Exempted from the laws of nature, O Virgin Mother, through thy supernatural birthgiving thou didst remain a Virgin even after giving birth; for thou didst bear the Author of all creation, O pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Strengthened by divine power, thou didst commit the gods of the ungodly to utter oblivion, O valiant athlete; and entering the tribunal, thou didst steadfastly suffer laceration and didst manfully endure the flame. Wherefore, thou didst pass through the divine struggle and, rejoicing, hast received the crown of victory. O all-praised Emilian, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee, the Virgin who, alone among women, without seed gave birth to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou didst nourish the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thy holy birthgiving as is meet, and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who bow down with faith before thine all-holy birthgiving.

Stavrotheotokion —

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer on the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and, bitterly lamenting, cried aloud: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The divine desire of God set thee most gloriously afire; wherefore, thou didst endure the burning of bitter wounds, didst immolate the gods of the ungodly and didst bedew the souls of the faithful, O all-blessed one.

Thou didst disdain temporal things for the sake of those which are abiding, and didst bind thy whole soul to divine love; wherefore, thou hast destroyed the might of impiety, O right wondrous passion-bearer Emilian.

Piously glorifying the one essence and one glory of the three-Sunned Godhead, O Emilian, thou didst enter the tribunal as a valiant warrior and didst cast the mighty serpent down to the ground.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Maiden, we glorify thee who alone hast been found to be the place of sanctity of Him Who hath hallowed us; for for thy sake we who live on earth have been deified and vouchsafed true life.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

With the drops of thy sacred blood thou didst extinguish the fire of ungodliness, O athlete Emilian; wherefore, thou hast poured forth a wellspring of miracles, which drieth up the lake of the passions, drowneth infirmities and doth engulf the demons.

The wicked one ordered thee stretched out and beaten; wherefore, as thy body was lacerated and subjected to flogging, O athlete, thou didst depict the blessed suffering of Him Who was wounded on the Cross.

Filled with spiritual gifts, O right wondrous one, thou healest the incurable ailments of the sick, causeth the burning of fever to cease, drivest out evil spirits and helpest all amid their griefs.

*Theotokion:* With thine effective remedies heal me who am wounded with the sword of sin, O thou who gavest birth to Christ the Savior, Who for my sake was wounded with the spear and hath pierced the heart of the serpent.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Thou wast enriched and filled with divine glory through thy martyrdom, O blessed one, and livest with the angels in the heavens. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Thou didst not spare thy mortal body; wherefore, thou hast inherited lasting immortality, having died for love of Him Who hath slain the passions, O glorious one.

The shrine of thy relics poureth forth the myrrh of healings, O valiant martyr who art most rich, and it ever dispelleth the fœtid sicknesses of men.

*Theotokion:* Eve plucked the deadly fruit from the tree; but thou, O all-pure one, hast given birth to the Tree of life, Whose taste hath given life to all the dying.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Aflame with divine zeal, thou wast not afraid of the ministering fire, but, fearlessly ascending of thine own will, thou wast consumed by the kindled fire, and didst offer thyself to the Master as a sacrifice. O glorious martyr Emilian, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Illumined with the grace of the divine Spirit, O blessed one, thou didst pass through the burning of the furnace and, unconsumed, didst chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Set alight by desire for Christ Whom thou loved, O blessed one, thou didst not fear the fire, and, bedewed therein by the Spirit, thou didst chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

In the beauty of thy sufferings thou didst emulate the incorporeal ones, O wise one, and standing with them before the all-comely Christ, thou chantest, rejoicing: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God of lordly name, with faith we cry out to thee; for thou gavest birth to Christ the Lord, our ineffable joy, to Whom we cry: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Destroying the worship of falsehood, O all-wise one, thou didst loose the bonds of him who held thee, and thou didst voluntarily give thyself over to torture, O all-praised one, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

“Lo, I have not been found by those who seek me, nor have I been revealed to those who asked after me!” thou dost cry, O all-glorious one; “Understand, ye iniquitous, for I have hastened to be slain as an innocent lamb, crying: Bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!”

The great Emilian hath summoned us to a banquet, offering us his struggles as sustenance. Let us spiritually partake thereof, O ye faithful, and chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Rain down drops of mercy upon me, O thou who gavest birth to the Wellspring of mercy, dry up the floods of my sin and still the raging waves of my soul, O Virgin Mary Theotokos, that I may glorify thee for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Desiring to behold the ineffable gladness and radiance of God, O glorious one, thou didst zealously despise all the beautiful things in this life, and, rejoicing, didst pass through thy martyrdom. Wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.

O all-praised one, preserved by the sweet savor of the Spirit and vouchsafed true glory, thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice, wholly consumed by fire, for the divine altar of Him Who was slaughtered like a lamb; wherefore, with love we call thee blessed.

Today thy memory hath shone forth upon us more brightly than the sun, O athlete, gladdening the hearts of all the faithful, illumining their thoughts and dispelling the darkness of infirmities; and we celebrate it with prayer.

The chosen choir of the firstborn hath acquired thee as a fellow citizen, and all the martyrs, beholding thee joining chorus therewith, rejoice. With them be thou also mindful of us who commemorate thee, O martyr of great renown.

*Theotokion:* With thy light illumine me who walk in darkness, O all-hymned one; grant me a helping hand and drive away the clouds from my soul. For thou dost still the tempest of my passions, O refuge of the desperate.

