The 20th Day of the Month of July

Commemoration of the Holy and Glorious Prophet Elijah

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...” —

With the light of the divine radiance of the three-fold Sun, with purity of mind and righteous judgment didst thou denounce the ungodly king as transgressor of the law, didst shut the heavens, and didst nurture the widow and her son. Pray thou, O prophet, that our souls be saved! *Twice*

Worthily honored with the prophetic office, with the divine vision of God and with understanding, O prophet divine, thou hast prophesied things afar off as though they were near. Thou didst denounce the king as unrighteous, and didst slay the shameful priests with a knife. Entreat thou Christ God, that our souls be saved!

The ungodly king, unable to endure thy reproof, said to thee, O prophet divine: “Art thou he who tormenteth and perverteth Israel?” And thou didst say: “Not I, O king, but it is thou and thy father’s house, in that thou hast forsaken thy God Who made thee, and hast brought in strange gods.” O Christ, through the prayers of Thy prophet, deliver us from such deception and save our souls!

Glory..., in Tone VI —

O godly prophet Elijah, denouncing the king, who had acted unrighteously, for the murder of Naboth and the seizure of his vineyard, thou didst boldly say: “Inasmuch as thou hast slain a man of Israel unjustly, thus shalt thou thyself be slain as well, and the dogs shall lick thy blood, and harlots shall wash themselves in thy blood.” O Christ, through the supplications of Thy prophet and favorite, deliver us from such a threat, and save our souls, in that Thou lovest mankind!

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

No one who hath recourse to thee, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, departeth from thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephrata...” —

O prophet divine, zealous for the Lord Almighty: by thy prayer thou didst shut up the heavens, saying: “Let rain and dew not descend upon the earth, save at the word of my mouth!”

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

O prophet of God, with prayer and compassion thou dost open the heavens again, and dost richly grant rain unto a thirsting people.

*Stichos:* Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

O prophet divine, thou didst nourish the widow and her son, by thy prayer increasing a handful of meal and a cruse of oil; for in accordance with the word of the Lord, the handful of meal and the cruse of oil did not diminish.

Glory..., in the same tone and melody —

O prophet of God, by thy prayer didst thou call down fire from heaven, and didst compel the king to say: “Truly God is the One Who is preached by Elijah!”

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O blessed Mistress, stretch forth thy holy hands to thy Son, the Creator that loveth souls, that He take pity on thy servants.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...” —

O compassionate Word Who translated Elijah the Tishbite from the earth in a fiery chariot: By his supplication save us who glorify Thee in faith and celebrate his divine and salvific memory.

In the earthquake and the gentle breeze thou didst perceive the coming of God which of old enlightened thee, O divinely blessed Elijah; and, seated in a chariot drawn by four steeds, amazed, thou didst traverse the sky in a strange manner, O divinely inspired one.

Aflame with zeal divine, thou didst slay the shameful priests with a knife; and with thy tongue thou didst constrain the sky, that it not rain upon the earth; and thou didst fill Elisha with grace divine, by the twofold bestowal of thy mantle, O wise Elijah.

And these stichera, in Tone II: the composition of John the Archbishop —

Two beacons have shone forth upon the world: the most radiant Elijah and Elisha. The one by the word of God shut up the drops of the rains of the sky, rebuked the king, and was upborne to the heavens on a fiery chariot; and the other cured bitter waters and, having received a double measure of grace, parted the Jordan’s streams. And now, joining chorus with the angels, they pray for us, that our souls may be saved.

The fiery chariot which caught thee up to the heavens on the air as in an earthquake, bestowed upon thee the fiery grace of miracles, O Elijah the Tishbite, rendering thee incorrupt, that thou wouldst not see death until thou hadst proclaimed the end to all. Wherefore, come thou, granting us the instruction of thy worthy deeds.

O inextinguishable beacon of the Church, aflame with zeal divine, prophet Elijah! Thou didst shut up the drops of heaven; and, fed by a raven, thou didst rebuke the king, and didst put the priests to death; fire from heaven didst thou call down, and, having slain the two captains of fifty, thou didst sustain the widow with oil and a small handful of meal, and didst raise her son from the dead by thy prayer; fire didst thou kindle amid water; the streams of Jordan didst thou traverse on foot; thou didst ascend to the heavens on a fiery chariot, and didst bestow upon Elisha a double measure of grace. Pray thou unceasingly to God, that our souls be saved!

Glory..., in Tone VI: the composition of Byzantius —

Come, ye assembly of the Orthodox, and, gathering together in the most honored temple of the divinely eloquent prophets today, with psalmody let us chant a harmonious hymn unto Christ our God Who hath glorified them; and with joy and gladness let us cry out: Rejoice, O Elijah of great renown, earthly angel and heavenly man! Rejoice, O most honored Elisha, who received from God a double measure of grace! Rejoice, ye fervent helpers, intercessors and physicians of the souls and bodies of Christ-loving people! From every hostile attack and evil circumstance, deliver those who with faith celebrate your most festive memory!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Third Book of the Kings

The word of the Lord came unto Elijah the prophet, and he said unto Ahab: “As the Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, liveth, before Whom I stand, there shall not be these years dew nor rain, except by the word of my mouth.” And the word of the Lord came to Elijah, saying: “Depart hence eastward, and bide thee by the brook of Cherith, that is before Jordan. And it shall be that thou shalt drink water of the brook, and I will charge the ravens to feed thee there.” And Elijah did according to the word of the Lord, and he sat by the brook of Cherith before Jordan. And the ravens brought him loaves in the morning, and flesh in the evening, and he drank water of the brook. And it came to pass after some time, that the brook was dried up, because there had been no rain upon the earth. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah, saying: “Arise, and go to Zarephath of the Sidonian land. Behold, I have there commanded a widow-woman to maintain thee.” And he arose, and went to Zarephath, and came to the gate of the city: and, behold, a widow-woman was there gathering sticks; and Elijah cried after her, and said to her: “Fetch thee, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And she went to fetch it; and Elijah cried after her, and said: “Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of the bread that is in thy hand.” And the woman said: “As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in the pitcher, and a little oil in a cruse; and, behold, I am going to gather two sticks, and I shall go in, and prepare it for myself and my children, and we shall eat it and die.” And Elijah said to her: “Be of good courage. Go in, and do according to thy word: but make me thereof a little cake, and thou shalt bring it out to me first, and thou shalt make some for thyself and thy children last. For thus saith the Lord: The pitcher of meal shall not fail, and the cruse of oil shall not diminish, until the day that the Lord giveth rain upon the earth.” And the woman went and did so, and did eat, she and he, and her children. And the pitcher of meal failed not, and the cruse of oil was not diminished, according to the word of the Lord which he spake by the hand of Elijah. And it came to pass afterward, that the son of the woman who was mistress of the house was sick; and his sickness was very severe, until there was no breath left in him. And she said to Elijah: “What have I to do with thee, O man of God? Hast thou come in to me to bring my sins to remembrance, and to slay my son?” And Elijah said to the woman: “Give me thy son.” And he took him out of her bosom, and took him up to the chamber in which he himself lodged, and laid him on the bed. And Elijah cried aloud, and said: “Alas, O Lord, the witness of the widow with whom I sojourn, Thou hast wrought evil for her in slaying her son.” And he breathed on the child thrice, and called on the Lord, and said: “O Lord my God, let, I pray Thee, the soul of this child return to him.” And it was so, and the child cried out, and he brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and give him to his mother; and Elijah said: “See, thy son liveth.” And the woman said to Elijah: “Behold, I know that thou art a man of God, and the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true.”

A Reading from the Third Book of the Kings

The word of God came to Elijah the Tishbite in the third year of the reign of Ahab, saying: “Go, and appear before Ahab, and I will bring rain upon the face of the earth.” And it came to pass when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said to Elijah: “Art thou he who perverteth Israel?” And Elijah said: “I do not pervert Israel: but it is thou and thy father’s house, in that ye forsake the Lord your God, and thou hast gone after Baalim. And now send, gather to me all Israel to Mount Carmel, and the prophets of shame four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, that eat at Jezebel’s table.” And Ahab sent to all Israel, and gathered all the prophets to Mount Carmel. And Elijah drew near to them all; and Elijah said to them: “How long will ye halt between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, follow him.” And the people answered not a word. And Elijah said to the people: “I am left, the only one prophet of the Lord; and the prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men, and the prophets of the groves four hundred. Let them give us two oxen, and let them choose one for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire on the wood; and I will dress the other bullock, and put on no fire. And do ye call loudly on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord my God, and it shall come to pass that the God Who shall answer by fire, He is God.” And all the people answered, and said: “The word which thou hast spoken is good.” And Elijah said to the prophets of shame: “Choose to yourselves one calf, and dress it first, for ye are many; and call ye on the name of your god; but apply no fire.” And they took the calf, and dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning till noon, and said: “Hear us, O Baal, hear us!” And there was no voice, neither was there hearing, and they ran up and down on the altar which they had made. And it was noon, and Elijah the Tishbite mocked them, and said: “Call with a loud voice, for he is a god; for he is meditating, or else perhaps he is engaged in business, or perhaps he is asleep, and is to be awakened.” And they cried with a loud voice, and cut themselves according to their custom with knives and lancets until the blood gushed out upon them. And they prophesied until the evening came; and it came to pass as it was the time of the offering of the sacrifice, that Elijah the Tishbite spoke to the prophets of the abominations, saying: “Stand by for the present, and I will offer my sacrifice.” And they stood aside and departed. And Elijah said to the people: “Come near to me.” And all the people came near to him. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of Israel, as the Lord spake to him, saying: “Israel shall be thy name.” And he built up the stones in the name of the Lord, and repaired the altar that had been broken down; and he made a trench that would hold two measures of seed round about the altar. And he piled the cleft wood on the altar which he had made, and divided the wholeburnt offering, and laid it on the wood, and laid it in order on the altar, and said: “Fetch me four pitchers of water, and pour it on the wholeburnt offering, and on the wood.” And they did so. And he said: “Do it the second time.” And they did it the second time. And he said: “Do it the third time.” And they did it the third time. And the water ran round about the altar, and they filled the trench with water. And Elijah cried aloud to heaven, and said: “Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, answer me, O Lord! Answer me this day by fire, and let all this people know that Thou art the Lord, the God of Israel, and I am Thy servant, and for Thy sake I have wrought these works. Hear me, O Lord, hear me; and let this people know that thou art the Lord God, and Thou hast turned back the heart of this people!” Then fire fell from the Lord out of heaven, and devoured the wholeburnt offerings, and the wood, and the water that was in the trench; and the fire licked up the stones and the earth. And all the people fell upon their faces, and said: “Truly the Lord is God; He is God!” And Elijah said to the people: “Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of the escape.” And they took them, and Elijah brought them down to the brook of Kishon, and he slew them there. And Elijah said to Ahab: “Make ready thy chariot, and go down, lest the rain overtake thee.” And Elijah went up to Carmel, and stooped to the ground, and put his face between his knees, and prayed to the Lord. And it came to pass in the meanwhile that the heaven grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab wept, and went to Jezreel. And the hand of the Lord was upon Elijah, and he girt up his loins, and ran before Ahab to Jezreel. And Ahab told Jezebel his wife all that Elijah had done, and how he had slain the prophets with the sword. And Jezebel sent to Elijah, and said: “If thou art Elijah and I am Jezebel, God do so to me, and more also, if I do not make thy life by this time tomorrow as the life of one of them.” And Elijah feared, and rose, and departed for his life: and he came to Beersheba, to the land of Judah, and he left his servant there. And he himself went a day’s journey in the wilderness, and came and sat under a juniper tree; and asked concerning his life that he might die, and said: “Let it be enough now, O Lord. Take, I pray Thee, my life from me; for I am no better than my fathers.” And he lay down and slept there under a tree; and behold, someone touched him, and said to him: “Arise and eat.” And Elijah looked, and, behold, at his head there was a cake of meal and a cruse of water; and he arose, and ate and drank, and returned and lay down. And the angel of the Lord returned again, and touched him, and said to him: “Arise, and eat, for the journey is far from thee.” And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Mount Horeb. And he entered there into a cave, and rested there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and said: “What doest thou here, Elijah?” And Elijah said: “I have been very zealous for the Lord Almighty, because the children of Israel have forsaken Thee: they have digged down Thine altars, and have slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I only am left alone, and they seek my life to take it.” And He said: “Thou shalt go forth tomorrow, and shalt stand before the Lord in the mount; behold, the Lord will pass by.” And behold, a great and strong wind rending the mountains, and crushing the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire, the voice of a gentle breeze. And it came to pass when Elijah heard that, he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went forth and stood in the cave; and behold, a voice came to him, and said: “What doest thou here, Elijah?” And Elijah said: “I have been very zealous for the Lord Almighty; for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, and they have overthrown thine altars, and have slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I am left entirely alone, and they seek my life to take it.” And the Lord said to him: “Go, return, and thou shalt come into the way of the wilderness of Damascus; and thou shalt go and anoint Azael to be king over Syria. And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy stead.”

A Reading from

the Fourth Book of the Kings

It came to pass in those days that Elijah found Elisha, the son of Shaphat, and he was ploughing with oxen. There were twelve yoke before him, and he with the twelve, and he passed by to him, and cast his mantle upon him. And Elisha left the cattle, and ran after Elijah, and said: “I will kiss my father, and follow after thee.” And Elijah said: “Return, for I have done a work for thee.” And he returned from following him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled them with the instruments of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate: and he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered to him. And it came to pass, when the Lord was going to take Elijah with a whirlwind as it into heaven, that Elijah and Elisha went out of Gilgal. And Elijah said to Elisha: “Stay here, I pray thee; for God hath sent me to Bethel.” But Elisha said: “As the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.” And they both went on. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went also, and they stood opposite afar off: and both stood on the bank of the Jordan. And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the water: and the water was divided on this side and on that side, and they both went over on dry ground. And it came to pass while they were crossing over, that Elijah said to Elisha: “Ask what I shall do for thee before I am taken up from thee.” And Elisha said: “Let there be, I pray thee, a double portion of thy spirit upon me.” And Elijah said: “Thou hast asked a hard thing: if thou shalt see me when I am taken up from thee, then shall it be so to thee; and if not, it shall not be so.” And it came to pass as they were going, they went on talking; and behold, a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and it separated between them both; and Elijah was taken up in a whirlwind as it were into heaven. And Elisha saw, and cried: “Father, father, the chariot of Israel, and the horses thereof!” And he saw him no more: and he took hold of his garments, and rent them into two pieces. And Elisha took up the mantle of Elijah, which fell from off him upon Elisha; and Elisha returned, and stood upon the bank of Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah, which fell from off him, and smote the water, and they did not divide; And Elisha said: “Where is the Lord God of Elijah?” And Elisha smote the waters a second time, and they were divided hither and thither; and Elisha went over as on dry land.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera to the saint, in Tone IV —

O blessed prophet, thou didst share in incorrupt union in God my Savior. Parting the Jordan by prayer, thou didst cross it as dry land, and wast caught up on a fiery chariot to the heavens, leaving Elisha a double portion of grace. Wherefore, we beseech thee: though thou hast been caught up in body, yet sunder not thyself from us in spirit, and ever entreat the Lord, that our souls be saved.

O prophet of God, thou wast shown to be a luminous cloud, letting fall a shower of divine knowledge upon all the faithful, richly giving the wine of gladness as drink unto all who with faith have recourse to thy most divine temple. Wherefore, we entreat thee, O divine prophet and God-seer Elijah: Grant health to our Orthodox hierarchs, and great mercy to our souls.

Thou didst subject the flesh to the governing mind, O divine prophet Elijah, diligently ascending in thy heart as by steps. Wherefore, having rebuked the unrighteous king and pronounced the sentence of the wrath of God, with a knife didst thou destroy the shameful priests as unrighteous, and hast clearly taught all to cry out: “Truly there is one God: Him Whom Elijah hath preached!”

Glory..., in Tone VI —

O, the commands of the ungodly king! O, the fast, full of blood and iniquity! Jezebel proclaimed a fast, that she might commit murder, and straightway Naboth the Israelite was slain. And what didst thou say to these things, O prophet? “Thus saith the Lord: Inasmuch as thou hast unjustly slain a man of Israel, thus shall thy blood also be spilled, and harlots shall wash themselves in thy blood!” O Christ, by the prayers of Thy prophet and preacher, deliver our souls from such inhumanity, for Thou lovest mankind.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Entreat Him with our venerable father Tikhon and all the saints, we pray thee, O Mistress, that our souls find mercy.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...” —

Elijah, the most wondrous prophet, having illumined his mind with radiance, became wholly divine, and, beholding the unjust judgment of the impious king, was displeased. Wherefore, by the judgment of God he sent condemnation upon him; and likewise the queen, merciless and avaricious, he committed to the judgment of God. By the prayers of Thy prophet Elijah, O Christ, save us, in that Thou art merciful!

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

“How long, O Lord, will the way of the ungodly prosper?” thou didst say, O prophet. “Thou hast planted, and they have uprooted, and have brought forth the fruit of iniquity; truly, they themselves have perished wickedly through their impiety. They cry to Thee, but Thou hearkenest not. Why hast Thou shown me the godlessness of judges who transgress the law?”

*Stichos:* Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

O great Elijah, honored among the prophets: By thy prayers deliver from misfortunes and tribulations, and from the incursions of the pitiless foe, those who celebrate thine honored ascent; that we, the Christian people, may ever honor and bless thee, O most glorious prophet.

Glory..., in Tone VI —

O prophet, preacher of Christ, thou dost never depart from the Throne of Majesty, and ever intercedest for everyone afflicted with sickness. Ministering in the Highest, glorified in all places, thou dost bless the whole world. Ask thou for cleansing for our souls.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

Troparion, in Tone IV —

The angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, the second forerunner of the Coming of Christ, the glorious Elijah sent grace down from on High upon Elisha, to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. Wherefore, he poureth forth healings upon those who honor him.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the prophet, twice; Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone I —

Ascending on a fiery chariot as on the wings of the wind, O divine prophet, thou dost most gloriously make thy journey to the heavens today, leaving to Elisha a double portion of grace and thy mantle from on high. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Having loving recourse to thy goodness, we all entreat thee, the Mother of God, the true Virgin, who wast shown to be virgin even after giving birth, for we sinners have thee as our intercessor; and in thee who alone art immaculate we have obtained salvation amid dangers.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III —

Thy divine temple poureth forth healings upon all, O most wondrous prophet. With the most marvelous Elisha, entreat Christ to send down peace upon the world and great mercy upon the people that honor thee. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Each rightly fleeth to the place where he is saved; and what other such refuge which protecteth our souls have we but thee, O Theotokos?

Polyeleos; and this Magnification —

We magnify thee, O glorious Elijah, prophet and forerunner of the Coming of the Lord, and we honor thy fiery ascent to heaven in the flesh.

Selected Psalm Verses —

Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[54: 8\]

My soul hath thirsted for Thee; how often hath my flesh longed after Thee. \[62: 2\]

Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[39: 11\]

I have not concealed Thy mercy, nor Thy truth, from the great assemblage. \[39: 11\]

Thy righteousness have I not hid in my heart. \[39: 11\]

My tongue shall treat of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. \[39: 11\]

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

Being a lover of wisdom, O most honored prophet, openly denouncing the unjust king who acted unrighteously, thou didst constrain him to cry out: “Truly there is but one God: He Who is preached by Elijah!” And thence thou didst proceed to rebuke Jezebel for her plundering and love of gold. O prophet and forerunner of the Coming of Christ, Elijah of great renown: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with faith glorify thine ascent.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

All of us, the generations of man, bless thee, the Virgin who alone among women gave birth without seed unto God in the flesh. For the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and with milk didst thou nurture thy Creator and Lord as an infant. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and of men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

*Stichos:* The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel According to Luke, § 14 \[Lk. 4: 22-30\]

At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of the mouth of Jesus. And they said: “Is not this Joseph’s son?” And He said unto them: “Ye will surely say unto Me this proverb: Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country.” And He said: “Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Zarephath, a city of Sidon, unto a woman who was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.” And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast Him down headlong. But He, passing through the midst of them, went His way.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone IV —

On a fiery chariot wast thou taken up to the clouds, and wast translated to the land of light, O Elijah the Tishbite, having put the shameful prophets to shame. O thou who bound fast the sky by thy word, so also loose our transgressions by thy prayers to the Lord, and save thou our souls.

Canon to the Theotokos \(the Paraclysis\), with 6 troparia, including its Irmos; and two canons to the prophet, with 8 troparia —

Ode I

Canon I, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Let us chant a hymn of victory to the Lord, Who of old guided His people in the sea, and therein engulfed Pharaoh and all his army.

Desiring to behold the fiery power of the miracles of Elijah, his fiery and honored tongue and strength of spirit, we have assembled as is meet.

O God-bearer, our lips and the muteness and lack of skill of our tongue do thou rectify by the activity of the Spirit which is within thee, and illumine us, that we may hymn thy wonders.

Thou dost grant that which transcendeth nature unto those who have submitted to Thine honored precepts, O Word, and Thou dost make the portals of the rain subject to them through the Spirit, confirming their word.

*Theotokion:* To the Lord Who was born of the Virgin and Who hath renewed the world, and Who for her sake hath bestowed upon us life divine, we chant a hymn of victory, for He hath been glorified.

Canon II, the acrostic whereof is: “I sing praise to the great Elijah,” the composition of Hieromonk Pachomius, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Thou hast been shown to be a harp struck by the plectrum of God, O most wondrous prophet, hymning the omniscient God Who rewardeth all according to their deeds.

O wondrous prophet, unable to endure falsehood, thou didst denounce the unrighteous king for his iniquity. Wherefore, thou didst impose God’s sentence of condemnation, full of wrath, upon him.

O divine Elijah, prophet and forerunner of grace, having denounced Ahab, the iniquitous king, as a transgressor of the Law, thou didst destroy the shameful prophets as ungodly.

*Theotokion:* O ye faithful, let us make haste to praise the Mother of Christ in hymns as is meet, for she gave birth unto the Savior of all, Who is the Master of life and death.

Katavasia “I shall open my mouth...”

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

He Who alone sustaineth every living thing by His good will, through a raven provided thee with a banquet as a chosen guest, O Prophet. To Him do we all cry out: Thou art our God, and there is none holy save Thee, O Lord!

Grace be to the Benefactor and Guardian Who, in His ineffable providence, nourished the widow and the prophet. To Him do we all cry out: Thou art our God, and none is holy save Thee, O Lord!

O thou who didst forbid the rain-laden clouds to pour forth, when the widow of Zarephath was deprived of food, thou didst cause the remnant of her food to increase continually; and didst cry out: None is holy save Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou alone, surpassing everyone from ages past, hast been vouchsafed great things transcending nature, for thou didst receive the infinite God of all creation within thy womb and didst give Him flesh. Wherefore, we all honor thee as the Theotokos.

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

With mercy didst thou chastise all, and takest pity on all that with faith have recourse to thee in thy temple. And in asking help of thee they have in no wise erred.

Thou didst rebuke Ahab, the ungodly king, O divine prophet, and thou didst judge him with the judgment of God as a violator of the law.

The shameless Queen Jezebel sought to slay thee, O prophet most divine, for thou didst pronounce the sentence of death upon her unholy priests, as was meet.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, we hymn thee as a place of the priesthood of glory and the altar which held Christ, the Bread of life, O pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...” —

O ye faithful, with hymns let us all praise Elijah the Tishbite, the wellspring of miracles and adornment of prophets; for, being immortal while yet in the flesh, as a mortal he assureth us of the resurrection of the dead. Wherefore, having boldness before God, he granteth healing to those who ask with faith, and earnestly beseecheth Christ to bestow remission of offenses upon those who with love celebrate his holy memory. *Twice.*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Having fallen into subtle temptations through the activity of mine enemies, visible and invisible, I am caught fast in the tempest of my countless offenses. And I flee to the haven of thy goodness, as to my fervent help and protection, O pure one. Wherefore, O most pure lady, earnestly entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants that unceasingly pray to thee, O all-pure Theotokos, who dost ever beseech Him to grant remission of offenses to those who hymn thy glory as is meet.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Thou art shown to be one that cutteth off evil at its root and a planter of virtue, O wise prophet. Wherefore, we bless thee.

With reproaches the widow who fed thee upbraided thee for the death of her son, moving thee to raise him from the dead.

Thou didst clearly signify the glory of the Trinity with thy threefold breathing, and didst hand back alive the child to his mother.

O how thou didst burn, aflame with divine fire and zeal, O prophet, denouncing the king who wrought iniquities!

*Theotokion:* O pure one, who without seed didst conceive God, we entreat thee ever to pray for thy servants.

Canon II

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thee, O Lord, and was afraid; for by the ineffable Counsel of the Godhead, Thou, Who art God eternal, didst issue forth, incarnate, from the Virgin. Glory to Thy condescension, O Christ! Glory to Thy power!

The Lord crowned thee a prophet, O most wise one, granting thee the grace to foretell things of the future as though they were of the present. Wherefore, beholding now the fulfillments of thy words, we bless thee ever with praises as a true prophet.

As the soul of Thy prophet was most greatly adorned with humble-mindedness, O Christ God, aflame with zeal which surpasseth fire he destroyed the shameful priests.

Reflecting the Light with thy countenance, like a mirror, thou dost stand before the face of Christ, O most wondrous prophet, whence do thou mercifully visit us, that with praises we may all bless thee as a prophet.

*Theotokion:* Having acquired thee as our hope and confirmation, an impregnable rampart of salvation, O all-hymned one, we are delivered from all evil.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

The law of thy fathers hath showed thee forth as a true man of prayer, O Elijah, a wonderworker who transformed the nature of the elements and utterly consumed the righteous sacrifice with water.

As thou art a true minister of God, thou didst utterly put to shame the prophets of abominable shame, O venerable and most blessed Elijah, clearly marking the power of the Trinity.

Rendering priestly service through the word of grace, O Elijah, consumed with zeal as with fire thou didst slay the shameful priests with thy blameless hands.

*Theotokion:* To thee that gavest birth unto Christ, the Creator of all, we cry out: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, thou who hast shone forth the Light upon us! Rejoice, thou who didst contain the infinite God!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

O prophet Elijah, whom the unwaning splendor of divine grace hath revealed, having diligently acquired a mind most divine, thou dost move the pious to hymnody.

Who doth not marvel at thy divine zeal, O wondrous prophet? And who doth not hymn Christ Who hath given thee such great might?

With prophecy wast thou adorned by God, O Elijah, most wondrous prophet; wherefore, having wholly united thyself to God, denouncing falsehood, thou didst lead the Israelites to the knowledge of God.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, who gavest birth to the never-setting Sun, enlighten me who am utterly benighted by the passions, and fill me with light divine.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of offenses hath surrounded me, O Lord, but lead up my life from corruption, as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, O Lord.

A pillar of piety and the pure life, an instiller of purity, and an emulator of the angels wast thou, O wondrous God-bearer Elijah.

The wrath of the prophet-slaying woman, having frightened thee who had received the power to bind and loose the downpouring of the rains, O wondrous Elijah, caused thee to flee.

Having stooped to the ground, thou didst raise on high the supremely exalted eye of thy mind, by thine eminent entreaty causing the rains to be loosed; and with showers thou didst water the furrows of the earth.

*Theotokion:* The bush on Sinai, which touched the Fire without being consumed, prefigured thee, the Ever-virgin Mother, O all-hymned Theotokos Mary.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

A hymn of supplication do thou offer unto God, O most honored prophet, in behalf of all that have recourse to thy divine temple, that we may honor thee as a great helper.

The mind of man doth not suffice to praise thy life as is meet, O prophet; for, beholding the transfiguration of Christ, thou wast exalted far above the noetic ranks.

He that is Lord and Creator of all hath appeared to us in accordance with thy prophecy, O blessed Elijah, calling all men to the knowledge of Him, for He loveth mankind.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, pure vessel of virginity, cleanse thou my mind of the gloom of the passions, and fill my heart with righteousness, O all-immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone II —

O prophet, foreseer of the mighty works of our God, Elijah of great renown, who by thy voice didst restrain the cloud of rain: In our behalf entreat Him Who alone loveth mankind.

*Ikos:* Beholding the great iniquity of men and the great love of God for mankind, the prophet Elijah was troubled and grew wroth; and he addressed pitiless words to the Merciful One, crying out: “Be Thou angered against those who deny Thee, O righteous Judge!” But he did not move the compassion of the Good One to torment those who deny Him, for He Who alone loveth mankind doth ever await the repentance of all.

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The fiery bush on the mount and the dew-bearing furnace of Chaldæa manifestly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; for in thy material womb thou didst receive the divine and immaterial Fire without being consumed. Wherefore, to Him Who was born of thee do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Most gloriously vested with divine and formidable power, thou didst undertake a long journey, having eaten of food which sufficed thee for forty days, O wondrous Elijah. Wherefore, thou didst say on Horeb: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The mild and gentle breeze revealed the Lord to thee, O Elijah, who wast zealous for God Almighty: not the wind of the tempest, nor the earthquake, nor yet the fearsome fire. Wherefore, to meek Jesus didst thou chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Like the great Moses, thou wast vouchsafed the vision of God and prophecy, O wondrous Elijah, anointing prophets and kings with the Spirit. And having borne witness to the glory of Christ on Tabor, thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* In times past thou didst, supernaturally and without seed, give birth in the flesh to the unoriginate and preëternal Lord, the Son, Power and Wisdom of the Father, O all-pure one, unto the restoration of mortals. Wherefore, we cry out to Him Who was born of thee: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The people of Israel who came against thee with a captain of fifty thou didst utterly consume with fire from heaven as unworthy, O divine Elijah.

Thou wast a most divine prophet who wast rightly illumined with the vision of God, O most honored Elijah; and thou didst straightway put an end to the sacrifices offered to Baal.

Inasmuch as the all-holy Spirit gave thee the gift to prophesy, O most honored prophet Elijah, thou didst foretell the coming of the Son of God and didst sin not, O all-blessed one. To Him do we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Truly, as was meet, the poison of death was poured forth through the judgment of God and the hand of the prophet upon the shameful priests who ate unrighteously at the table of Jezebel.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, save me who am held fast by the abyss of offenses, and rescue me from all the malice of the foe, that, saved by thee, I may magnify thine aid.

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The bodies of the pious youths, clad in the same purity as their souls, quivered with awe, and the irresistible fire, though fed with boundless fuel, recoiled; but as the ever-living flame faded away, an everlasting hymn was chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Well did Ahab find the just destruction of his house, through the prophet’s condemnation, to be the dread retribution for his vile commission of murder. And with fiery mind the Tishbite chanted a hymn unto the Bestower of life: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

Fire rained down from heaven for thee, O Elijah, twice consuming captains of fifty, in that thou art God’s chosen minister; for to Him Who controlleth everlasting life thou didst in godly manner declaim the hymn: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

On Tabor Christ showed thee to be an initiate of the mystery of His divine incarnation, in that thou wast an instiller of purity and a most divine scion of virginity, showing the unapproachable light of the Godhead in His Body to thee who criest out: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Most rich was the womb of the Mother of God; for, having received the Word in the coarseness of the flesh and wrought therefrom a form earthly according to hypostasis, it was shown to be the city of God wherein the Most High was well-pleased to dwell. To Him do we chant: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

He that, as God, knoweth all things, entrusteth to thee, O Elijah, in that thou art faithful, the knowledge of things to come and of things that shall come to pass; and He showeth thee things which are afar off as though they were near.

Having strengthened thy mind with pious boldness, O blessed prophet, thou dost foretell those things that are far off as though they were near, O most honored prophet.

Having cleansed thy mind of all defilement, O divine prophet, thou didst therefore become completely holy, guiding all to the Light of God.

*Theotokion:* The Word, to Whom thou didst ineffably give birth, do thou entreat in behalf of those who faithfully honor thee, O pure Theotokos.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thee do we magnify, O blessed and most pure Theotokos, who through thy virginal womb ineffably didst make God incarnate, the Luminary Who shone forth before the sun and hath come to us in the flesh.

Having lived on earth the course which man cannot change, and crossed the Jordan’s stream by means of his mantle, the Tishbite, that air-borne charioteer, made a strange and heaven-traversing journey in the Spirit.

The Tishbite, aflame with the zeal of piety, was taken up on a fiery chariot; and he let drop his mantle; and Elisha, clad therein, received divine grace which he could not conceal.

The Tishbite and Moses the God-seer beheld in revelation on Tabor what eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, and what hath not entered into the hearts of earth-born men: the Lord Almighty, incarnate.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we magnify thee, who removed the severe condemnation which was of old the correction of our first mother, and who art ever the reconciliation of our race to God, a bridge to the Creator.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou hast been deified by the immaterial splendor of the life-creating Trinity, O prophet Elijah; wherefore, we all set thee forth as an intercessor to God for the world, O blessed one.

Thou wast known as an angel on earth, O divine prophet, and in heaven as a man of God; for the Lord Himself said: “Because thou art a stern man, O Elijah, thou canst not endure iniquitous Israel. Come thou up to Me, that I may come down!”

Thou didst live on earth as one of the bodiless ones, O divine prophet, and now, upborne to heaven, thou joinest chorus with the angelic choirs. From on high watch over us that hymn thee, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Thou dost hold in thine arms God Who upholdeth all things, and thou dost feed the Nourisher Who became like unto us, O pure one. Him do thou beseech, that He grant to thy people deliverance from all oppressors.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “O immutable Light...” —

The Light Who showed thee to be a charioteer traversing the sky on a fiery chariot drawn by four steeds, O Elijah, did not consume thee utterly; for with thy fiery tongue thou didst draw fire down and didst extinguish it with showers.

Glory..., another exapostilarion —

Thou wast caught up on a fiery chariot to the circles of heaven. And looking down therefrom, as thou art close to the Light, grant noetic light unto us that now celebrate thy holy memory with faith.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Thou wast the author of the blessings bestowed by God on the world, O Theotokos. Entreat now the easily-placated God for the salvation of all.

At the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “What shall we call you...” —

O wondrous prophet, when thou didst unite thyself to God by thy pure life of virtue, and hadst received dominion thereby, thou didst traverse creation in mind, didst by thy will shut up the floodgates of the rain, didst call down fire from on high, and didst destroy the enemy. Pray that our souls be saved.

Aflame with zeal for the Lord, thou didst openly denounce the iniquitous king, and didst zealously put to death the shameless priests, kindling fire amid the water, O blessed one. And thou wast a source of food not produced by cultivation, and with thy mantle didst part the waters of the Jordan. Pray that our souls be saved.

O prophet, when thou didst show forth on earth a life which was truly heavenly, enriched by the hypostatic Life within thee, thou didst resurrect a dead boy by thy breath; and thou dost remain apart from death for many years, for thou didst mount a fiery chariot and wast raised up to the Highest. Pray that our souls be saved.

And 3 stichera, the composition of Germanus, in Tone I —

The zealous Elijah, ruler over the passions, hath today been taken up in the air, the initiate of the mysteries and the inaugurator of universal salvation. O the precious glory, which the heaven-traversing prophet hath been vouchsafed! O the eminent adornment of the prophets! For, lo! by his reproofs he showed himself to be an angel in the flesh and an incorporeal man. Praising him, let us say: Help us, O wise one, on the day of judgment!

With spiritual songs let us all praise the prophets of Christ. For Elijah the Tishbite became a traverser of the heavens, and through his mantle Elisha received a double portion of grace from God; and they have been shown to be radiant beacons for the whole world, praying unceasingly in behalf of our souls.

O ye faithful, like David let us honor with hymns today the prophet of the Lord, Elijah the Tishbite, the most splendid zealot. For, lo! by his speech he shut off heaven like a curtain and rendered the fertile earth barren. O most glorious wonder! A man of earth doth not permit the heavens to rain! O wonder! A corruptible man is clothed in incorruption, and hath ascended to the heavens on a fiery chariot; and by his mantle he bestoweth a double measure of grace upon Elisha, and denounceth the king, and destroyeth the disobedient people with famine. He put to shame all the shameful priests, and raised up the widow’s son from the dead by his word. Through his supplications, O Christ our God, preserve all the right-believing Orthodox Christians in peace, granting them the triumph of victory over their enemies.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

O ye faithful, let us honor in song the chiefs among the prophets, the most radiant beacons of the whole world: Elijah and Elisha. And let us joyously cry out to Christ: O compassionate Lord, through the supplications of Thy prophets, grant Thy people remission of sins and great mercy.

Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I, and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

*Stichos:* The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.

A Reading from the General Epistle of James \(5:10-20\).

Brethren: Take the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy who endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is full of pity, and of tender mercy. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he who converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

*Stichos:* A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man and gladness for the upright of heart.

Gospel according to Luke, §14 \[4:22-30\]

At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of the mouth of Jesus. And they said: “Is not this Joseph’s son?” And He said unto them: “Ye will surely say unto Me this proverb: Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country.” And He said: “Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Zarephath, a city of Sidon, unto a woman who was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.” And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast Him down headlong. But He, passing through the midst of them, went His way.

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

