The 23rd Day of the Month of July

Commemoration of the holy martyrs

Trophimus, Theophilus, and those with them.

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Pochaev Icon of the Theotokos\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...” —

Undaunted, thou didst enter the judgment hall, O martyr; thou didst endure sufferings and laceration, and wast wounded, wounding the enemy contender; and thou didst grasp the victory over him, O Trophimus. Wherefore, pray thou, that our souls be given peace and great mercy.

Leading a choir of martyrs with thyself, thou didst suffer, O wise one; and rejoicing with them, thou hast received heavenly blessings as is meet. With them remember us who with faith praise thee, entreating Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

O ye faithful, let us praise the martyrs, Trophimus and Theophilus, and the other thirteen; for, having quenched the fire of deception with their precious blood, they live already in the kingdom on high, ever asking that our souls be given peace and great mercy.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

Woe is me! What shall become of me? Having defiled mind, soul and body with transgressions, what shall I do? How shall I avoid the unbearable flame, the indissoluble and everlasting bonds? Yet do thou, O all-immaculate one, entreat thy Son before the end, that He grant me remission of my sins.

Stavrotheotokion —

O undefiled Virgin, once beholding upon the Tree Him to Whom thou gavest birth from thy seedless womb, rending thy hair, unable to bear the wounding of thy womb, thou didst say: “O Thou Who holdest all creation in Thy hand, how is it that, like one condemned, Thou art lifted up upon the Cross, O Thou Who desirest to save mankind?”

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs have received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at naught the tormentors, and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their prayers save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Canon, the composition of the venerable Andrew of Crete, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

I sing to Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou hast shone upon us a day of gladness which banisheth falsehood: the commemoration of Thy martyrs.

Like the sun in the firmament of the Faith hast thou shone forth, appearing in the world, wherein thou hast illumined the ends of the earth with thy sufferings, O martyr.

O blessed Trophimus, with thy blood, as with golden streams, thou didst water the land which had nurtured thee, and which is nurtured by thy sufferings as with inexhaustible food.

*Triadicon:* In Orthodox manner we glorify the Trinity, the Son and the Holy Spirit with the Father — the one Godhead, the Unity in three Hypostases.

*Theotokion:* The angel brought thee word from heaven of thy passing over to God, and he brought the world together for the joy of the annunciation.

Ode III

*Irmos:* My heart hath been established in the Lord my God; wherefore, the strengthless have girded themselves with power.

Wounded at the tribunal with those who suffered with him, the martyr rejoiced, foreseeing the bestowal of ineffable rewards.

Thy blood which flowed forth utterly consumed ungodliness, having kindled for everyone the fervor of the knowledge of God, O Trophimus.

Thine athletes, having the martyr in their midst, like a sun amid stars, covered falsehood with darkness, O Lord.

*Triadicon:* Let us worship the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Essence in three Hypostases, the Godhead in one kingship.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast a Virgin among mothers and a Mother among virgins, and thou dost astonish every thought of both, O pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “The choir of the angels...” —

Having passed through torments with valiant mind, and received victory over them, O blessed one, by grace thou didst transform a wolf into a lamb, and didst move him to suffer with thee in faith. Wherefore, we all joyfully honor thee, O all-glorious Trophimus.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians, with the heavenly hosts unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in manner past understanding and recounting, thou gavest birth, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto us who with faith and love ever glorify thee.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd suspended upon the Tree, weeping and crying out maternally, exclaimed: “How can I bear Thy condescension and voluntary sufferings, which pass recounting, O my Son, mine all-good God?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thee, O God, and I was afraid; I understood Thy works, O Lord, and I was filled with awe, for the earth is full of Thy praise.

I have heard, O God, of the steadfast courage of the martyrs, which they showed when suffering for love of Thee; and marvelling, I glorify Thee, O Thou Who alone art our Savior.

The great martyr, protected by the shield of faith, and having noetically drawn the sword of the Spirit, cut off the heads of the ungodly.

Adorned with the beauty of the virtues and crowned with glory, O great martyr, thou didst put the persecutor to shame, submitting to fire and slaughter for Christ.

*Triadicon:* I hymn the three Hypostases of the Godhead in one Essence — the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit — as a single effulgence of the three-sunned nature, the one God.

*Theotokion:* How is it that thou givest suck, O Virgin? How givest thou birth according to the laws of maternity? For He to Whom thou gave birth is God incarnate Who restoreth nature as He Himself hath said.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou didst dispel the darkness of my sin, O Lord, when Thou didst shine forth the radiant dawn of Thy commandments, O Light unapproachable.

With thy splendid preaching thou didst dispel the gloom of godlessness; and with thy divinely radiant confession thou didst put the enemy to shame, O Trophimus, athlete of Christ.

As thou didst love God with a divine love, O martyr, true to thy name thou wast shown to be the expulsion of ruination which is abominable to God, being an excellent martyr of Christ.

Putting on honor as a robe of purple dyed in your own blood, O martyrs, as emulators of the God of all ye reign with Him in the heavens.

*Triadicon:* O Trinity equal in glory and honor: unoriginate and unbegotten Father, begotten Son and Holy Spirit, Thou art my God, O Lord, Thou Light unapproachable.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O undefiled vessel of God, who among virgins gave birth and among mothers was a pure virgin, from whom the Lord, the Savior of all, came forth.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beset by the storm of sin, and held fast within the belly of the monster, with the prophet I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O Lord, and save me!

Broken by stones and staves, ye in no wise fell away from the Faith, but became destroyers of the madness of idolatry, O blessed ones, laying hold of the trophies of victory.

Raised aloft and lacerated, Trophimus the theologian denounced the falsehood of idolatry, nurturing the hearts of the faithful as is meet with godly doctrine.

The stars of suffering, shining forth, destroyed the gloom of unbelief. Wherefore, having shone forth the light of the day of salvation, pray ye, O martyrs of the Lord, that we may be saved therein.

*Triadicon:* O Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Trinity equally reigning, possessed of one form, unoriginate, Unity indivisible, equal in honor, in three Hypostases, transcendent: Thee doth all creation hymn.

*Theotokion:* Let the vile heresies keep silence concerning thee, O pure Theotokos, for most true it is that thy birthgiving transcendeth nature as seedless, yet thou givest birth like other mothers, in accordance with the law of nature.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Burning in the furnace, the fire quaked with fear; and the children were bedewed and said, chanting: Blessed art Thou, Who alone existest, O God of our fathers!

The angels marvelled at Thine athletes who held the flesh in contempt, and mortals cried out: Blessed art Thou, Who alone art the God of our fathers!

The upraised arm of Thy power crushed Thine enemies, O Lord, when Thy martyrs reposed in the Faith amid bitter torments.

Some of Thy passion-bearers were stoned, and others were set afire; with them Trophimus reposed, chanting unto Thee Who art God: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Triadicon:* O three-Sunned Divinity, sole Kingdom, unoriginate, everlasting Father, Son and Spirit: Blessed art Thou alone, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O dread mystery! O strange marvel! How is it that she who alone is blessed, who gave birth unto the God of our fathers, hath been shown to be a Mother, yet remaineth a Virgin?

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* All ye works of God and all creation, bless the Lord! Ye venerable and lowly of heart, hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou wast shown to be a noetic pillar which made firm those who suffered with thee, O Trophimus; and thou didst destroy the arrogance of the ungodly with the faith of Christ, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

Standing before the tribunal with radiant countenance, thou didst fill the iniquitous with awe; and thou didst show forth thy joyful suffering to be for Christ, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

Shown to be a many-starred heaven, the divinely elect company of athletes in godly manner hath illumined those in the world with the Faith of Christ, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

*Triadicon:* We hymn the unoriginate Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the consubstantial Trinity, the one Cause and Godhead, praising and hymning Him forever.

*Theotokion:* Every mortal tongue hymneth thee, O Virgin, for thou didst shine forth the unapproachable Light, Christ God Who enlighteneth the world, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* With hymns do we magnify thee, the Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, the heavenly bridal-chamber, who gavest birth to the Author of our salvation.

With hymns do we magnify thee, O athlete, who wondrously finished the course of thy suffering and received the crown of victory from Christ God.

With hymns do we magnify thee, O divinely revealed athlete, for like Moses thou didst show thyself to be the leader of those who suffered with thee to the life which ageth not.

O choir of martyrs worthy of God, in that ye vanquished falsehood and have received splendid crowns from God, pray ye that we be saved.

*Triadicon:* With hymns do we magnify Thee: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Unity of three Hypostases, the indivisible Essence.

*Theotokion:* With hymns do we magnify thee, the bush which Moses beheld, burning, yet unconsumed, having received the fire of the Divinity.

