Also on The 24th Day of the Month of August

Commemoration of the Holy New-hieromartyr Maximus Sandovich, Protomartyr of the Lemko People

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

O holy martyr Maximus, as thou didst receive the grace to confront death with bravery and to confess the Holy Faith in the face of the heretics, entreat Christ, we pray, that He make us steadfast in Orthodoxy. *Twice*

Having proclaimed the sanctity of the Orthodox Faith, when thou wast felled by the weaponry of the cruel heretics thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of the Savior. And soaring aloft to the heavens, thou now abidest in never-waning light, O Maximus. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VI —

O wondrous hieromartyr, persecuted and imprisoned for the sake of Orthodoxy, thou didst provide an example for all by meekness, love and humility; and the Holy Spirit taught thee what to say while the heretics slew thy body.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Like the Archangel, we, the faithful, hymn the bridal-chamber of heaven, the portal truly sealed: Rejoice, thou for whose sake hath sprung forth for us Christ, the Savior of all, the Bestower of life and God! With thy mighty arm cast down the tyrants, our godless foes, O all-pure Mistress, thou hope of Christians!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

Ye mountains of Carpathia, leap for joy at the memorial of thy pious son, the hieromartyr Maximus, the protector of his people, who prayeth to Christ God for all who honor him.

*Stichos:* The righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Magnify the Lord, ye Lemko people, and together with the ranks of angels, celebrate the memory of your kinsman Maximus, who watcheth over you from on high, where he standeth with the incorporeal hosts before the throne of the Godhead.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

All ye who love the feasts of the Church, with gladness let us assemble today, to keep festival in memory of Maximus, the protector and defender of the Orthodox, who, undaunted, faced death with courage, and was put to death for the Faith.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Xenophobia, the cruel and bitter hatred of thy race and Faith, enraged the Austrian authorities against the Slavic peoples, and the ancient foe of mankind inspired them to slaughter the meek and humble Lemko people. Then wast thou again cast into prison, and taken from thence to be slain for the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, O holy Maximus, having stood steadfast for the Truth, thou hast received recompense in the heavens.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

I flee to thy protection, O holy Virgin Theotokos, for I know that through thee I shall obtain salvation; for thou art able to help me, O pure one.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, there to learn the rightness of the Orthodox Faith, thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of Zhitomir, and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. For Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, and thereby hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. O hieromartyr Maximus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Under thy heavenly protection do we sinners flee, begging thee to intercede with the Lord in our behalf, for, beset by storms of temptations and the hatred and malice of our enemies, our feeble powers are exhausted, and we barely have the strength to stand fast for the Truth. But do thou help us in our struggle, O holy Maximus. *Twice*

Spurning the heresy of the Latins, thou didst flee to Mount Pochaev, the bastion of pure Orthodoxy; and with the holy hierarch Anthony as thy teacher, thou didst study the doctrines of piety and the dogmas of truth. And after thine ordination to the priesthood, thou didst return to thy native land, where thou didst nurture thy pious flock in the pastures of righteousness. Pray thou, that we all be saved.

Exult thou, O divinely preserved Lavra of Pochaev, blessed home of the Mother of God, and resting place of the venerable Job! For thy long struggle in defense of the True Faith hath produced a glorious victory, the martyrdom of the priest Maximus, whom Christ, the Judge of the contest, hath crowned with a heavenly diadem for his unwavering confession.

And 4 stichera, idiomela, in Tone VI —

Now is the village of Zhdynya glad, for it witnessed the birth of the holy hieromartyr, a beacon leading his people, who were languishing in error, to the True Faith! And they cry out to God with compunction: O Lord Almighty, God Most High, through the prayers of our father Maximus, have mercy upon us and grant us Thy grace!

The city of Zhitomir is exalted, for therein the holy hieromartyr Maximus studied diligently the commandments of the Lord, the writings of the holy fathers and the precepts of the Faith, storing these up in the coffer of his heart, that with these priceless treasures he might ransom his flock from slavery to heresy and error.

Rejoice, O village of Grab, for thou didst call the holy hieromartyr Maximus to the pastoral ministry, and he blessed thee with the grace of the Holy Mysteries, that thy people might make spiritual ascents, from glory to glory, and attain unto the mansions of heaven, where the righteous dwell with the angels of God.

Every Orthodox Christian praiseth thee, O city of Gorlitsa, for within thee the holy Maximus triumphed over the wiles of the enemy and held fast to the confession of the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, exult thou exceedingly, for thy stones have been sanctified by the blood of the martyr, who dyed his vesture therein, that, splendidly arrayed, he might join his Master at the heavenly wedding-feast.

Glory…, in Tone II —

After God and His all-holy Mother it is to thee that the Lemko people flee amid their tribulations and sorrows. For, though oppressed and afflicted by their enemies, yet have they not lost hope in the mercy of God; and placing their trust in the supplications of the holy Maximus, they pray with compunction, that the Most High may have mercy upon them and save their souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

The shadow of the law passed away when grace arrived; for, as the bush wrapped in flame did not burn, so the Virgin gave birth and yet remained a Virgin. In place of the pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth. Instead of Moses, Christ is come, the Salvation of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera idiomela, in Tone III —

Thou didst hasten to the Lavra of Pochaev, fleeing the errors of the Latins as Lot fled Sodom; and in that tranquil monastic haven thou didst find the pearl of great price — the holy Orthodox Faith — which thou didst purchase with thy blood in martyrdom. Wherefore, O holy Maximus, the faithful honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, in Tone IV —

Having left the dark West of the setting sun, thou didst move toward the Sun of righteousness in the East; and having been illumined there by the never-waning radiance of light divine, which thou didst shine upon thy much-suffering people, who had languished long in the darkness of Latin domination. Entreat Christ God, that He enlighten and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Ever-virgin, immaculate Mother of God, who without seed gavest birth to thine own Creator, add thine entreaties to the supplications of the holy Maximus, that the Lord may have mercy upon His sinful servants.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…” —

Merciful and all-loving is the good Shepherd, Who left the flock and searched for thee, the lost sheep, in the mountains of Carpathia; and He brought thee back into the fold of the Orthodox Church, from whence thine ancestors were stolen away by false-shepherds and hirelings, betrayed to the ravening wolves of heresy. Beseech him, O holy hieromartyr, that He deliver us from our transgressions.

*Stichos:* The righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Eyes uplifted to the heavens, thou didst cry out, “Bless, O Lord!”, when the ungodly aimed their weapons at thee. But thou didst not fear those who killed thy body, for they were unable to kill thy soul, and it took flight to the refuge of heaven, where it resteth in the bosom of Abraham with all the saints of God, O valiant martyr Maximus.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Returning to thy homeland after thy priestly ordination, thou didst lead thy people out of bondage to Latin error, as Moses led the children of Israel forth from Egyptian slavery; and they entered into the promised land of Holy Orthodoxy. Look down from heaven, O right glorious martyr, and by thy supplications unto God ask that we may receive His grace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone II —

Come, ye lovers of the martyrs, and let us extol the holy hieromartyr Maximus, the glory of Carpathia, the boast of the Lemko people, the adornment of the Orthodox Church, the good shepherd who laid down his life for his sheep; and with hymns and spiritual songs let us sing his praises, for, dwelling with the ranks of angels on high, he prayeth unceasingly for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

In thee have we placed our trust, O Theotokos. Lest we lose hope, save us from perils, O helper of the tempest-tossed, and confound the counsels of the adversary, for thou art our salvation, O blessed one.

After the Blessing of the Loaves, Troparion, in Tone IV —

Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, there to learn the rightness of the Orthodox Faith, thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of Zhitomir, and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. For Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, and thereby hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. O hieromartyr Maximus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the hieromartyr, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: the resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

Full of the grace of God, thou didst blamelessly minister to thy flock, confirming the words of thine instruction with works of the virtues; and inspiring all to mercy and loving-kindness, thou didst teach them not to take the broad way which leadeth to destruction, but to tread the straight and narrow way whereby we may attain unto the heavenly homeland.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Unvanquished by the hordes of the enemy is the fortress of thine intercession, O all-immaculate one; for thou didst conceive the Lord and Master of all without knowing man, and without experiencing the pangs of childbirth didst give birth to Him. Wherefore, as our heavenly intercessor, shelter and protect our souls, that we may obtain great mercy.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V —

Leaving thy parents and the home of thy childhood, thou didst risk arrest by traveling to Mount Pochaev, seeking safe harbor amid the raging storms of life. And arriving at the holy Lavra thou didst find tranquillity of soul, and wast nurtured with pure Orthodox dogmas and the living water of true piety; so that when the time came for thee to suffer for the Faith, thou didst possess the spiritual strength to endure to the end.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Jesus most sweet, the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was conceived within thy womb through the activity of the Holy Spirit, received thine immaculate soul in His all-pure hands, and bore it up to the heavens, from whence thou dost look down upon us, thy lowly servants, and intercedest at His fiery throne, that He deal with us according to His infinite mercy.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy hieromartyr Maximus, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Our God is refuge and strength \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the ­righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied .\[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…” —

Even the most eloquent of orators cannot praise thy valor and endurance as is meet, O holy hieromartyr; for, unafraid, thou didst face thine executioners, and with courage didst pray that the Holy Faith be established. Great is the reward thou hast received for thy steadfastness, O Maximus, from the right hand of the Judge of the contest.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Storm-tossed upon the sea of life, the ship of my soul is foundering, heavy laden with a burden of unrepented sins, and the billows of the passions unceasingly buffet it. But do thou save me from perishing in my transgressions, O Theotokos, thou good pilot of my soul, and steer me to the shelter of the safe harbor of thine intercessions.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 38

\[Mt. 10: 32-38\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man’s foes shall be those of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

Unto thee, the intercessor for the Lemko people, do we cry aloud in prayer: Help us, O father Maximus, for our enemies are more than the sands of the sea, and they persecute and oppress the little flock of Christ; but extend to us thy strong right arm, and save us from perishing.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the holy hieromartyr, with 8 troparia, in Tone III —

Ode I

*Irmos:* To God, Who alone saved His people in the sea and engulfed the adversaries, let us sing, for He hath been glorified.

Sanctify my tongue with the burning coal of Thy grace, O Word of God, that I may worthily hymn the glory of the holy hieromartyr Maximus.

Thou hast led thy lowly people across the sea of temptations, and hast restored them as the New Israel, in the promised land of Orthodoxy.

Heavenly angels and earthborn men join chorus together in honor of thy martyrdom, O holy hieromartyr Maximus, for thou didst struggle well to the end.

*Theotokion:* After God it is in thee that the Orthodox set their hope, O Theotokos. Protect us from all evils and afflictions by thine intercession.

Katavasia: According to the Typicon.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou hast broken the bow of the enemy and hath crushed their shields by Thy might, O Christ our Master. O Lord, our confirmation, holy art Thou!

The mountains of thy homeland leap for joy over thy wondrous martyrdom, O holy one, for the Lord hath made thee heir to the throne of His glory.

How great is the power of thy mediation before the Most High, O Maximus, for in heaven the Lord hath exalted the horn of His anointed priest.

Elijah the Prophet mounted to heaven on a chariot of fire, and thou didst ascend on the chariot of thine own blood, for thou didst show that the mighty were not strong in their own strength.

*Theotokion:* Holy is the Lord, O most pure Virgin. For in His boundless compassion He worketh judgment and righteousness in the midst of the earth.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII —

All the forests and glades of Carpathia clap their hands in gladness, and its mountains and hills leap for joy; for the child of their bosom now standeth in supplication before the Almighty, making earnest entreaty in behalf of all who honor his sufferings and undeserved death. Wherefore, let the whole world rejoice exceedingly, having gained a new and bold intercessor, a mediator for peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Virgin and Mother wast thou shown to be by thine Offspring, O all-immaculate one; and even after giving birth thou didst remain a virgin, as thou wast before. Wherefore, as thou hast maternal boldness before Christ, thy Son and God, unceasingly entreat Him to grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* O pure one, Habbakuk foresaw thine all-pure womb as a mountain overshadowed; wherefore, he cried aloud: God cometh from Thæman, the Holy One from a mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.

Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thy martyric struggle as is meet, O hieromartyr Maximus, for, standing firm, thou didst await the executioners’ blows, and with thy dying breath didst bless the holy Orthodox Faith.

Maximus the wise, who though young had mastered the wisdom of the aged, shed his blood for his people, and cried out to the tyrants: “Long live Holy Orthodoxy!” Wherefore, he now abideth in the heavens.

Every Orthodox Christian is astonished by the endurance and confession thou didst show the world at the time of thy murder, O holy martyr, for thou didst love no one more than the Lord Almighty.

*Theotokion:* Round about the throne of the all-holy Trinity the ranks of angels chant in chorus the thrice-holy hymn; and we on earth joyously repeat the cry of the archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!

Ode V

*Irmos:* We rise at dawn unto Thee, O Christ God, the Dawn of truth Who hast shone forth upon us from the Virgin, and with divine knowledge hast illumined us who are in the darkness of ignorance.

Chosen by God as an enlightener for His people, and ordained for them by His all-holy Spirit, thou didst wake their slumbering spirit unto the dawning of His never-waning light.

Ye who are oppressed, remember the Lord in tribulation, and be mindful of the affliction which the holy one endured for the sake of His Savior; for through his mediation your nation shall not perish utterly.

O the majesty of thy holiness, O holy Maximus our father! For through thine instructions zeal laid hold upon an uninstructed people, as saith Isaiah the prophet.

*Theotokion:* Now let us hold excellent festival, O ye Christian people, proclaiming the Mother of God to be the Virgin who gave birth to the timeless God, our Light and Joy.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I have been cast into the abyss of the heart of the sea of iniquities, and like Jonah I cry unto Thee: Lead me up from corruption, that I may render my supplications unto Thee, O Lord!

How have those who observe vain and false things abandoned mercy for themselves, thou didst say with the prophet Jonah, O holy one; but thou didst sacrifice unto the Lord in purity and truth.

In the earth were thy precious remains interred, O holy father, but the earth surrendered its priceless treasure when, moved by the supplications of the faithful, the Holy Church glorified thee.

Sacred and all-hallowed is thy holy memory, O Maximus, and the sound of thy holy confession was borne forth to thy suffering people, filling their hearts with love for the Lord, and for thee, His faithful servant.

*Theotokion:* Soon each man must needs depart this vale of tears, and go whither his faith and deeds lead him; but do thou, O Theotokos, ask mercy of the Lord, that we not be condemned to darkness and flame forever.

Kontakion, in Tone IV —

Enlightened and moved by thy martyrdom, toward the Orthodox Faith, were our people. For giving up thy life for Christ God, thou didst endure tortures and sufferings in prison. Pray for us, and for thy native land, before Christ our God.

*Ikos:* Resting with the saints in the bosom of Abraham, thou dost ascend unto the Lord from glory to glory, O holy hieromartyr Maximus; for in accordance with thy name, thou didst prove to be a champion most great, steadfast in thy confession of the triune God, faithfully opposing the errors of the Latin-minded. Wherefore, assembling this day to celebrate thy holy memory, we entreat thee: Pray for us, and for thy native land, before Christ our God.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Proud was the tyrant; yet he was as a plaything for the children; for, trampling underfoot the flame heated sevenfold, they chanted: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Virtue and goodness made their abode in thy heart, O blessed Maximus, and meekness and charity dwelt likewise within thee. These things do thou instill in the hearts of those who honor thee.

All things wherein we have greatly sinned have been brought upon us for our transgressions, O Lord; wherefore, hearken unto the supplications of the great Maximus in our behalf.

Now are we unable to open our mouth, for we have become shame and reproach for our brethren. But through the entreaties of the holy Maximus have mercy upon us, and save us.

*Theotokion:* The Mother of One of the all-holy Trinity didst thou become at the Father’s good pleasure and by the activity of the Spirit, O Theotokos. Wherefore, blessed is the Lord God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace did not consume the children, nor did the fire of the Godhead harm the Virgin. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry out with the children: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

Sins and offenses were all washed away with the outpouring of thy martyric blood, O holy one; and having entered the bridal-chamber of the Lord in fitting vesture, thou dost chant with the saints and angels: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely unto the ages!

Darkness and gloom are fled away from thy splendid memorial, O hieromartyr, for the effulgence of thine honored countenance, full of the splendor of the uncreated light, illumineth all who chant: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely unto the ages!

*Triadicon:* All the faithful bless the Lord, Who is worshipped by angels and men in three Persons without confusion, and they call upon their priests to cry: Bless the Lord, ye servants of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Verily the words of thy song have been fulfilled, O all-immaculate Virgin, for the Mighty One hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart, and hath exalted the holy Maximus, who with his people was of low degree.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, in oneness of mind let us magnify with hymns the Mother of the Light, the haven of salvation for our souls, who remained a Virgin after giving birth.

Israel of old blessed the Lord their God, for He visited and wrought redemption for His nation; and the New Israel likewise praiseth him, for He hath raised up a horn of salvation in the house of the holy Maximus.

David, the king of Israel, danced in ecstasy before the ark of the covenant; and Maximus, the priest of the Lord, stood faithfully at His sacred altar, offering up the unbloody Sacrifice in holiness and righteousness.

As the prophets of old proclaimed, the Lord hath delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, that we might serve Him without fear. Wherefore, the holy Maximus was not afraid of the threats and tortures of the tyrants.

*Theotokion:* Never shall we falter in our praise of thee, O Mother of God, for with incomparable maternal boldness thou dost mediate peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Exapostilarion —

Dying, thou didst bless the Lord thy Savior, and didst proclaim aloud His Holy Orthodox Faith, O martyred priest of God. Wherefore, full of joy, we magnify thy virtues and steadfast endurance, and utter praises to thee at thy memorial.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

In toils and travails, amid misfortunes and tribulations, thy faithful servants call upon thee, whom Christ our God hath given us to be our mother. O Theotokos, look down upon us from the heights of heaven, and be thou a tireless mediatress before God for us sinners.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

Seated in glory upon the throne of the cherubim, O Lord and Master of all, Thou didst help Thy servant Maximus, mindful of Thine infinite mercy; for having languished in a prison cell, he was taken forth to be put to death, and when the time came to surrender his soul into Thy hands, O Almighty One, he confessed Thee with boldness before those who tortured him. *Twice*

A great and holy mystery do we proclaim! Behold, Maximus, priest and martyr, is upborne like a ship upon the tide of his blood, having skillfully traversed the raging sea of temptations, and navigated the perilous shoals of tortures. And arriving at the tranquil harbor of salvation, he presenteth himself to his Master; and having done what is good and virtuous in His sight, he hath entered into the joy of His Lord. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone II —

All-holy is the Spirit Who proceedeth from the Father alone, and Who spake within thee when thou wast brought before the judges for the sake of Christ, having been delivered up by the enemies of the Holy Church, and hated unjustly for His name’s sake. Yet thou didst endure to the end and wast saved, and at that same hour wast taught by the Spirit what to say, to confound the wicked plans of the ungodly.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Come ye all, and let us glorify the Mother of Light, crying out with unceasing hymns, for she gave birth unto our Salvation! And let us offer her the salutation, “Rejoice!”, as to her who alone gave birth unto the ultimate Author of all things, Who was God before the ages. Rejoice, thou who hast set fallen Eve aright again! Rejoice, O all-pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock!

Great doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III & 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the hieromartyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII —

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the Church of the saints.

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \[II Tim. 2: 1-9\]

Timothy my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please Him Who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the Word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elects’ sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 36

\[Mt. 10: 16-32\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end shall be saved.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

