The 27th Day of the Month of July

Commemoration of the Holy Great Martyr and Healer Panteleimon

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Seven Enlighteners of the Slavs and Bulgars\)

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera: 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...” —

O thou who wast rightly called Panteleimon, when thou didst extend to all the loving care of souls, showing forth healing of their bodies, thou wast enriched with a fitting name, discovering the reward of virtue and the recompense of piety, O martyr, revealing thyself as a crowned and invincible warrior of Christ our God, Whom do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

O thou who dost ever draw forth the grace of divine healing from the immaterial wellsprings of the Savior, and pourest it forth abundantly, and grantest it to those who have recourse to thee, O most blessed one: all that faithfully celebrate thy glorious, most sacred and radiant festival do thou manifestly illumine with grace divine, O thou who hast been anointed with a God-like name and with goodness. And pray thou that grace be given to all that hymn thee.

Cruelly assaulted by sea and fire, with many torments was thy fiery love for Him Who is Desire itself then tested. Wherefore, thou didst cast down the author of evil, clearly receiving the richly bestowed and life-bearing activity of the Comforter. Thereby thou didst most gloriously show forth the dead man as alive, O divinely blessed one, and didst effect divers healings, O all-blessed one.

And these stichera, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II —

Without fee hast thou given grace to men, O glorious martyr Panteleimon, and thou dost expel evil spirits by the invocation of Christ, and grantest the blind to see, for thou art His true favorite. Entreat thou the Physician, O most blessed one, that He grant the world steadfast peace, and great mercy to those who love thee. *Twice*

The faith of thy pious mother didst thou desire, and thou didst correct the godlessness of thy father; for, confirmed by the teachings of Hermolaus, wast thou baptized by him, O glorious martyr Panteleimon. Entreat thou our merciful God, the Physician of the infirm, the Dispeller of the passions, that they that celebrate thine all-honored memory with faith be delivered from temptations.

The deception of thy father didst thou reject, O most glorious one, taking to heart the words of thy mother. Thou didst bring forth fruit more precious than gold, as the Lord hath said, and didst show thyself to be an exemplary physician, O glorious martyr Panteleimon. Travelling the path of grace, thou didst come upon a child who had been bitten by a viper, lying on the ground; and, having prayed to God, earnestly entreating Him, thou didst straightway raise up the child and didst cut asunder the beast. Wherefore, be thou mindful of us who keep thy memory with faith, that we may find mercy on the day of Judgment.

Glory..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI —

Today hath the precious memory of the unmercenary one shone forth, summoning the faithful to a mystical banquet, and leading the assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church to the festive solemnity. For a wonderworking physician hath arisen among us, healing the infirmities of all: Panteleimon, the steadfast athlete. And he prayeth earnestly to the Lord, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is ­measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera to the saint —

*In Tone I:* Thou didst fight the good fight and didst finish the course of thy martyrdom, O martyr Panteleimon. Wherefore, thou joinest chorus with the angels in the Highest, for thine afflictions having gained for thee the kingdom of heaven, as is meet. Pray thou, therefore, O most blessed physician, that we be granted great mercy. *In Tone II:* With what beauty of hymnody shall we honor thee, O Panteleimon, who shinest forth radiantly in comeliness of body and spiritual beauty; who wast enlightened with love of the mind and adorned with quickness thereof; who, young of stature, yet subtle of intellect, didst mature through divine teachings and attain Christ with heartfelt love?

With what hymns shall we exalt thee, O Panteleimon, whom the Lord hath glorified with words and deeds transcending nature and hath raised on high by a multitude of miracles; whom He illumined with the splendor of many gifts and adorned with the glory of divine crowns; whom Christ our God, Who hath great mercy, hath granted as an intercessor amid misfortunes unto those who are in need?

With what hymns of praise shall we exalt thee, O Panteleimon, who wast imbued with Christ-like goodness and grantest great mercy to all through the works of the All-merciful One, like an ever-flowing river of living water, pouring forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee with faith.

*In Tone V:* The most holy memory of the martyr shineth forth like the sun upon the ends of the earth, and unceasingly granteth healing unto the faithful, dispelling infirmities and curing the passions. For Panteleimon doth ever pray to Christ God, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory..., in Tone V —

Come, ye who love the martyrs, and in oneness of mind let us all praise the athlete of Christ, who fought well for piety and hath been invested with the honor of a victor, a beacon for the whole world and an ever-shining star of the Church. And crying out to him, let us say: O glorious martyr Panteleimon, be thou the salvation of our souls and bodies, our steadfast protection, praying unceasingly to the Lord in our behalf, that He save us!

Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone —

We, the faithful, bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we glorify thee as is meet: the steadfast city, the unassailable rampart, the firm intercessor and refuge of our souls!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I —

Come, ye people, let us hymn the valiant athlete Panteleimon, who struggled for piety; and let us say: Rejoice, steadfast champion of the Faith, as were the prophets and apostles! Rejoice, thou who didst have Christ within thyself, emulating Paul in thy deeds! Rejoice, calm haven for those who are at sea! Rejoice, O our boast, joy of the Church of the faithful!

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Having found the good path in childhood and anointed thy heart with the mercy of Christ, thou dost heal the infirmities of those who earnestly entreat thee. Thus, thou didst raise up a dead man by thy prayers and hast received the kingdom of heaven, O most blessed Panteleimon.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Let us praise the athlete of Christ, the wise Panteleimon, who slew the serpent with the power of the Cross, and by the prayers of Hermolaus raised up a young man from the dead, and put to shame words of unholy wisdom, and who doth unceasingly pray that all be granted the forgiveness of offenses.

Glory..., in Tone VIII —

Having come to love the piety of thy mother and to disdain the ungodliness of thy father, thou didst become a warrior of the Physician of souls and wast instructed in the healing arts. Well skilled in both, thou wast shown to be a destroyer of sufferings and a physician of souls. And as thou didst acquire steadfastness in suffering and perseverance in prayer, O Panteleimon, martyr of Christ, earnestly pray that our souls be saved.

Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy passion-bearer and healer Panteleimon, entreat the merciful God, that He grant our souls remission of transgressions.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone I —

Thou didst cleave unto the piety of thy mother, O blessed one, and didst piously correct the ungodliness of thy father; wherefore, thou didst receive from God the grace to heal the infirmities of all the afflicted, who with faith and love have recourse unto thee, O glorious martyr Panteleimon. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion —

O most holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians, who in manner passing understanding and recounting gavest birth unto God: With the hosts of heaven pray thou unceasingly that all of us who glorify thee with faith and love be granted remission of our offenses and correction of life.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

All of us, the faithful, praise thee as an invincible warrior of Christ and a most valiant champion, O beauteous adornment of the martyrs, celebrating thy holy memory with faith, O all-praised martyr. And together we glorify thine honored struggles, O wise one, and magnify Christ our Savior.

Glory..., and another Sessional hymn —

Thou didst suffer manfully for Christ; and, having preached the Faith to thy father, thou didst draw him forth from the pit of ungodliness, O all-praised one. Undaunted by the impious reasoning of the tormentors, thou didst put to shame the impotent audacity of the demons. Wherefore, thou didst obtain from Christ the grace to heal infirmities and to expel evil spirits, O all-praised Panteleimon. Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love.

Now and ever...: Theotokion —

Ineffably didst thou give birth unto God Who shone forth from before the ages from the Father and hath in these latter days revealed Himself through thy womb, O Theotokos. He is the Light of revelation to the gentiles and the salvation of all the world, and enlightenment and consolation for those who sit in darkness and hymn thee with faith. Wherefore, O Mistress, pray thou that He illumine me with the light of knowledge and grant my heart compunction, that I may wash away my sins with tears.

The Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer, great martyr and healer Panteleimon, and we honor thy precious sufferings, which thou didst endure for Christ.

Selected Psalms —

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the ­righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be ­multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

Today the assemblies of the faithful celebrate thine honored struggles, O passion-bearer Panteleimon, glorifying the Bestower of life, Who hath revealed thee to us as a mighty intercessor. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion —

All of us who in love have recourse to thy goodness know thee to be the Mother of God who wast truly shown forth as a virgin even after giving birth. We sinners have thee as an intercessor and have acquired thee as our salvation amid misfortunes, O thou who alone art all-immaculate.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

The Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be ­multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Luke, §106

\[Lk. 21:12-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone II —

O Panteleimon, physician of God: Entreat the merciful Christ, that He deliver me from the passions and have mercy upon me.

Or, this sticheron, in Tone III —

Today hath thy glorious memory shone forth, O much-suffering Panteleimon, summoning us who love the feasts of the Church to praise and glorify Christ our God, Who in thee hath revealed to us a source of miracles. Wherefore, having recourse to the shrine of thy relics, we receive gifts of healing, unceasingly glorifying Christ the Savior Who hath crowned thee, and lauding Him unto the ages.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \(the Paraclysis\), with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and that of the great martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Panteleimon, the most eminent martyr,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Having earnestly drawn nigh unto Christ before thy repose in Christ, thou didst first raise up a dead man. And now by thy prayers do thou enliven me who have been slain by the sting of sin, O most bountiful Panteleimon.

Like a star didst thou shine forth, having in thy youth a mature and divinely wise mind. And having acquired beauty of soul with comeliness of body, thou didst appear before the all-glorious Word as most splendid.

Having died to the world, O blessed one, and put on Christ through the font of baptism, thou didst become a God-bearing instrument and a receptacle of the activity of the Spirit, pleasing to all and healing the afflictions of all.

Having made wisdom thy sister, and become known as a partaker of life, thou wast honored by her, and wast adorned with a crown of gifts, shining with the radiance of divine splendor, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy and pure one, who gavest birth to Christ, with blessings hast thou crowned our nature which was expelled by the Creator for disobedience; and thou hast freed it from corruption. Wherefore, rejoicing, all of us, the faithful, bless thee.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Hearkening to the words of the Spirit, thou didst become like good and fertile land, receiving the precious Seed and giving rise to salvation of souls, O thrice-blessed one.

Having been reborn in manner divinely inspired, thou didst slay the arrogance of the serpent’s sting and didst restore a soul to life; and thou standest before the King of all.

Thou didst put to shame the godless edict of the tormentors, and didst hasten to Christ. Having purchased Him with all thou hadst, thou becamest a great merchant, O divinely wise one.

Loving the piety of thy mother, O glorious one, thou didst despise the greatly vexatious godlessness of thy father; for, possessed of reason, thou didst choose that which is better.

*Theotokion:* The Lord, Who holdeth all creation in His divine hand, is borne on thine arm, O Virgin. Him do thou now entreat, that He deliver from misfortunes those who hymn thee.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph was amazed...” —

O ye faithful, with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs let us render brilliant praise to Panteleimon, the valiant contender for Christian piety; for through him hath the tyranny of the invisible foe been trampled down by divine might, and healing of infirmities hath been richly bestowed by the Lord upon those who faithfully celebrate his divine and honored festival.

Glory..., and another Sessional hymn, in the same tone and melody —

Thou didst obey the words of the wise Hermolaus, O martyr, and didst straightway forsake earthly activities as abominable, impotent and pernicious, having in thy heart the sufferings of Christ as the teachings of life, and granting health to the incurably ill, O Panteleimon. Wherefore, pray thou in behalf of those who celebrate thy memory with love.

Now and ever...: Theotokion —

Tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of the passions, O pure one, I, who am without conscience, cry unto thee with fervor: Disdain me not, wretch that I am, for I perish, O thou who gavest birth to the Abyss of loving-kindness: and beside thee I have no hope. And trusting in thee, may I not therefore be an object of joy and mockery for mine enemies; for whatsoever thou dost desire thou canst do, in that thou art the Mother of the God of all.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Following the Master in love, thou didst distribute thy wealth among the destitute, laying thyself bare to suffering, through which thou didst pass, foreseeing hope eternal.

Thou didst offer a sacrifice of praise unto God, openly reviling the worship of idols; and all the insolence of the ungodly didst thou tread underfoot, O passion-bearer.

Thou didst set invincible might against those who were devoured by jealousy and assailed by wrath, O martyr; and having armed thyself, thou didst overcome ungodly despondency.

He Who was held in the arms of the Elder Simeon did by the words of an elder lure thee to divine knowledge, O Panteleimon, unto the salvation and deliverance of many.

*Theotokion:* Young men and virgins make haste to follow in thy steps, seeing thee to be virgin and maiden as well as mother; for thou alone hast ineffably combined both into one, O Bride of God.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Joyously didst thou take up the struggles of torture, protected by power divine; and steadfastly receiving torments with patience, thou didst cry out, rejoicing: We know none other God than Thee!

Possessed of the mettle of youth and having acquired uprightness through steadfastness of soul, thou didst courageously endure every wound with manly intent, O blessed one, strengthened by the grace of the divine Cross.

With heavenly teaching did the athlete thrust aside the contrary preaching of those who were in error and, strengthened by Thine activity, O Christ, he became for many the cause of most glorious salvation.

*Theotokion:* All the sayings of the most wise, the most glorious images, and prophecies of the prophets, in latter times clearly prefigured thee, the Theotokos; for we know none other who is pure save thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

False idols didst thou spit upon, and thou didst cast down vaunted falsehood, working wonders and effecting cures, O divinely wise one.

Thou wast shown to be a crown bearer, O most eminent one, for thou didst pass through fire and water. And, bound to the wheel, thou didst most gloriously destroy the mindless.

Having set at naught the arrogance of the tormentors, thou didst with effort endure the beating of thy body, O divinely wise one, bearing the blows with spiritual strength and grace.

*Theotokion:* Him Who as God doth hold the ends of the earth together is held in thine arms, O pure one; He that is infinite in His divine form is contained in a body.

Kontakion, in Tone V —

Emulating the Merciful One, and receiving from Him the grace of healing, O passion-bearer and martyr of Christ God, by thy supplications heal thou our spiritual infirmities, ever driving away the temptations of the foe from those who cry out with faith: Save us, O Lord!

*Ikos:* O ye who love Christ, let us piously hymn the memory of the unmercenary one, the valiant athlete, the faithful healer, that we may receive mercy though, like me, we have defiled our bodily temples; for He granteth healing to soul and body, O beloved. Wherefore, let us strive, O faithful brethren, to have in our hearts the strength of Him Who delivereth from deceit those who cry: Save us, O Lord!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The all-wise children did not worship the golden body, but entered into the flame themselves and mocked the gods of the heathen. They cried aloud in the midst of the flame, and the Angel bedewed them, saying: The prayer of your mouths hath already been heard.

Thou didst suffer lawfully, and, having conquered the foe, hast become a calm haven for those who are tempest-tossed upon the sea, O glorious one; and, being a light unto those who are in the darkness of this life, thou hast taught us to sing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Blessed art thou, and well is it now with thee, O most blessed one, who hast received thy most rich and blessed hope, that which hath been prepared for those who cry out to the Lord in faith: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The souls of the saints, the choirs of the righteous and the angelic ranks of the bodiless hosts have received thee into their number, O blessed one. For, having been beheaded with a sword, thou dost sing, rejoicing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* The weapon which aforetime warded us away from the Tree of Life is now withdrawn, marked with the Blood which flowed from the side of thy Son, O all-immaculate one. Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The skill of thy talents healed the spiritual blindness of thy father, and it granteth light through faith to those who have recourse thereto, O most blessed one, guiding all to Christ the Savior.

Slain for Christ, thou didst pass over to eternal life, and wast shown to be divinely named with the name of God, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, we honor thee and exalt Christ supremely forever.

Having dispelled the skillful prating of the learned rhetors by the invocation of Christ, thou dost cut short the assaults of painful sufferings, healing those who exalt Christ supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* We know thee to be a ray of the Source of immortality, O Theotokos, for thou gavest birth to the immortal Word of the Father, Who delivereth from death all that exalt Him supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Rejoicing, thou didst pass on to thine ultimate desire, where, having made thine abode, O most blessed one, thou wast truly vouchsafed to receive a blessed end, being with thy Master for endless ages.

Thou didst receive thy desire and the fulfillment of thy love which doth yet shed drops of thy warm blood which was shed for Christ. And rejoicing, thou hast received crowns from Him for thy struggles.

Like Daniel of old, thou didst shut the mouths of the lions and the jaws of wild beasts; for even irrational nature doth know enough to stand in awe of virtue, O martyr. Wherefore, assembling, we bless thee, O most glorious one.

Christ granteth abundant goodness, bestowing upon us a treasury of healing in thee and giving thee, who art most merciful of intent, to all that sorrow as a calm haven, and intercessor and protector.

*Theotokion:* Like the fleece, O all-immaculate one, thou didst bear the Rain of heaven, having conceived in thy womb Him Who granteth peace unto those who chant to Him as God and proclaim thee to be the all-hymned Theotokos.

Exapostilarion —

God foresaw thy merciful soul and proclaimed thee to be Panteleimon, which signifieth full of mercy, for thou dost pour forth healing upon those who are in need, O holy one, having overcome the audacity of the tormentors by thy patience.

Theotokion —

With unceasing hymns we piously hymn the Theotokos, crying out: Rejoice, O holy mountain! Rejoice, fiery throne of the King of all! Rejoice, boast of angels and glory of the saints!

At the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...” —

The working of the providence of the Most High was radiantly shown forth upon thee; for, manifestly taught to heal bodily sufferings, O Panteleimon, thou hast been found to be an exemplary physician of souls, healing all with the word of grace, and delivering from dark deceit those who have recourse unto thee.

Emulating the mercy of God, thou wast rightly called Panteleimon, receiving a second name and a like activity. For as thou art sympathetic thou takest pity on all, granting them twofold healing, nourishing and curing, and guiding them to divine knowledge, O glorious one, and to the all-radiant Christ, O thou who art most rich.

Bodily comeliness didst thou courageously exchange for spiritual beauty, O divinely wise one, and the beauty of the flesh for mental prowess; and radiating signs and wonders, thou didst amaze those who beheld thee, O martyr, having received in the bloom of thy youth the mind of those who are of advanced age, enlightened with faith and grace.

*In Tone V:* Like the sun, the most radiant memory of the martyr enlighteneth the ends of the earth, and unceasingly bestoweth healings upon the faithful, driving away infirmities and healing the passions; for Panteleimon doth ever pray to Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory..., in Tone IV, the composition of Byzantius —

Today hath the memory of the passion-bearer shone forth. Come, ye faithful, let us be glad in spirit, and let us crown him with hymns, for with the power of the Cross hath he manfully conquered the invisible foe; and fearing not the boundless torments of the torturers, he hath rightly received the honor of an exalted name. And he now abideth eternally with the angels. O Panteleimon, martyr of Christ, physician of the afflicted and haven of the tempest-tossed: Cease not to entreat the merciful God, that our souls be saved!

Now and ever...: Theotokion —

With unceasing hymns let us piously hymn the Theotokos, crying aloud: Rejoice, O holy mountain! Rejoice, fiery throne of the King of all! Rejoice, boast of angels and glory of the saints!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Odes III and VI of the canon to the great martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \(II Tim. 2: 1-10\)

Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore, I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God shall they blossom forth.

Gospel According to John, §52,

\(Jn. 15:17-16:2\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth Me hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

