The 28th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles & Deacons Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon & Parmenus

\(for this day we provide also the services in honor of our Father Pitirim, Bishop of Tambov; and of the Smolensk Icon of the Theotokos

\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

By the election of God were ye chosen to minister to the needs of the saints, as ye were full of divine wisdom, enlightenment and grace, O glorious ones. And now ye dwell in the heavens, rejoicing unceasingly with the angels.

Shown forth unto the world as radiant lamps by the grace of the Spirit, ye richly shone forth the effulgence of understanding and dispelled the gloom of evil; and, having passed on, O apostles, ye have made your abode in light never-waning.

Let the most sacred Nicanor be praised, and Parmenus and Timon, and with them let the godly Prochorus be honored, for they fulfilled the precepts of the Word and enriched those who had nothing, and pray fervently to our God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Hurled down headlong by my vile character, I lie prostrate, but hasten to thy tranquility, O Virgin. Deliver me from the tempest of the adversary and from multifarious temptations, that I may unceasingly hymn thy grace, O Theotokos, Ever-virgin Mother.

Stavrotheotokion —

When she beheld the Lamb lifted up upon the Cross, the immaculate Virgin cried out, weeping: “O my sweet Child, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How art Thou, Who holdest all things in the palm of Thy hand, nailed in the flesh to the Tree?”

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy apostles, entreat the merciful God, that He grant remission of transgressions to our souls.

AT MATINS

Canon of the apostles, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the rays of the noetic Sun”, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

In that ye share in the divine Light, O all-wise ones, deliver from the darkness of the passions those who celebrate your radiant and splendid feast, and vouchsafe enlightenment unto them.

Ye were drawn together by the sweet desire for Christ, O blessed ones, and, piously spurning the beauties of corruptible life, ye followed after Him to learn the truth.

Revealed as luminaries of the light-giving East, Parmenus and Prochorus, the wondrous Timon and the all-great Nicanor became light-bearing guides for men’s souls.

*Theotokion:* The ways of God became known in thee, O most immaculate one, through the ineffable union which took place through thy strange birthgiving. Wherefore, we glorify thee as the Mistress of all creation.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

As spiritual clouds, O glorious ones, ye let drop the water of true understanding upon those on earth, for their sanctification.

O all-wise ministers, through the election of the Spirit ye were filled with His grace, and were ordained to serve the needs of the saints.

Let us praise the glorious Parmenus, the wise Timon, the honorable Prochorus and Nicanor of exalted mind.

*Theotokion:* O pure and most immaculate Virgin, thou gavest birth to the good Lord, Who letteth fall a rain of sweetness, the deliverance from evils.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

O apostles of the Lord, ye divine clarions of the truth, precious vessels of piety, ye guides of the lost, who were shown to be saved: Rejoice, and entreat Christ God, asking Him to grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The one Lord became man, taking flesh in thy womb, and remained God, without being separated from the divine essence, preserving thee, His Virgin Mother, most immaculate after giving birth, as thou wast before birthgiving. Him do Thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who had sprung forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Shining forth in the heights of the Church like never-fading stars, the apostles of the Benefactor have driven away the darkness of impiety and illumined the world.

Ministering with the grace of the Gospel, O all-blessed Prochorus, thou wast the excellent teacher and divine primate of Nicomedia, presiding over the flock of Christ.

Thou didst inherit divine honor, O blessed Nicanor, having been slaughtered like a lamb with two thousand who placed their trust in Christ, on the same day as the protomartyr Stephen.

*Theotokion:* Without knowing wedlock thou gavest birth to God the Word incarnate, O all-pure one, in manner past understanding and recounting. Wherefore, we glorify and bless thee as is meet and right, O Virgin.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

O Lord, Thou didst send forth Thy disciples as clarions rousing the souls of those who hymn Thee from the graves of deception.

The sacred Timon, becoming the pastor of the Bostrians, received the blessed death of martyrdom, consumed by fire.

The great Parmenus reposed before the eyes of the angels, having completed his divine ministry with zealous ardor.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O most immaculate one, through whom we have been delivered from corruption, hell and the primeval torment of the wickedness of the deceiver.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Proclaiming the life which is to come, and the Cross and sufferings of Him Who suffered in the flesh in His loving-kindness, Nicanor was slain, meeting his death at the hands of the Jews.

Set afire with desire for the love of the Lord, the great Timon died amid fire, becoming a divine immolation at the command of the iniquitous.

O blessed apostles, your memory, which is divine, radiant and full of grace, doth sanctify the thoughts of all who keep it with faith.

*Theotokion:* The ranks of the incorporeal angels, the choirs of the apostles and the assemblies of the martyrs honor thee, O Theotokos; for thou didst ineffably give birth to the King of all.

Kontakion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The womb of the Virgin…” —

The glorious Nicanor, Prochorus, Parmenus and Timon, the honored deacons and eye-witnesses to the Word, have been shown to be chosen vessels of the Faith. Wherefore, we celebrate your sacred memory today, blessing you in gladness of heart.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Loving Christ with all your mind as the One Who is unique in goodness, ye have received the best portion, the kingdom of heaven, in that ye are truly all-glorious.

Honored by the Word, Who hath shone forth upon us from the Virgin, with discourse and sacred deeds, ye showed yourselves to be saviors of the faithful, transforming their ignorance, O blessed ones of God.

O Nicanor, thou didst suffer strangely, cut down by the malice of the impious Jews and brought to Christ like a lamb, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* At the word of the archangel, O Maiden, thou gavest birth to the Word of the Father, Who, by His word, created heaven and earth; and thou dost glorify Him, O all-pure one, Who bestoweth speech upon those who now believe on Him with purity.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

From the mire of the passions and vanity have ye delivered those who submit to your teachings, O all-wise ones; and ye have led to the heights of ­understanding those who have pleased God well and cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Let the godly Parmenus be honored with divine hymns, together with Timon, the most lauded Prochorus and the wondrous Nicanor, in that they are disciples of Jesus and enrichers of the nations, who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The Lord hath received you with Peter and the rest of the foremost disciples; wherefore, as ones full of faith, O glorious and all-praised ones, ye were numbered among the seventy, and were chosen well to minister to the needs of the saints.

*Theotokion:* Lo! the voices of the divinely eloquent attained their end, O divinely joyous one, when thou gavest birth to the transcendent Lord Who is revealed by them, unto the salvation of the faithful, who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Ye were shown to be vessels of the Word containing all His effulgence, the foremost of the honored servants who ministered to the needs of the saints, O all-wise ones, who enjoy ineffable glory with the Word.

Today all creation doth celebrate your memory, O Timon, Parmenus and Nicanor, together with Prochorus, the preacher of God, worthily blessing you, O all-blessed eye-witnesses of God.

As godly disciples of the Word ye have been taken up in great glory, and ye rejoice now with choirs of the incorporeal angels. With them ever pray that we find mercy, O glorious ones.

*Theotokion:* Joyously do we cry out to thee the cry of the archangel: Rejoice, O joy of the angels, honor of the apostles, preaching of the prophets, crowning of the martyrs!

