Also on The 28th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints Pitirim, Bishop of Tambov

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone IV —

Come, ye faithful, let us glorify God, the Bestower of all good things, Who hath given us a wonderworker, the holy hierarch Pitirim, who prayeth without ceasing for us all. *Twice*

Rejoice, O region of Tambov, for from thee hath shone forth a new beacon of grace which driveth away the darkness of temptations and misfortunes from those who cry out with faith: O holy hierarch, father Pitirim, entreat God in behalf of us all!

Great are the signs of faith! By a spring of water are wonders wrought, the vesture of the holy hierarch worketh miracles, and his tomb leadeth to life all who venerate it with faith!

Glory…, idiomelon, in the same tone —

O brethren, let us praise the holy hierarch Pitirim today, and with spiritual songs let us cry out to him: Rejoice, our good shepherd, who hast assembled the people of God for thy festival! Rejoice, thou who hast joined angels and men together in glorification! Rejoice, adornment of hierarchs and ornament of priests! Rejoice, healing of the sick and consolation of the sorrowful! Rejoice, thou fervent intercessor for us all!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O blessed Virgin Theotokos, impassable gate which hath been mystically sealed: Accept our supplications and bear them to thy Son and God, that through thee He may save our souls.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…” —

Rejoice, O blessed father Pitirim! for, having cleansed soul and body of the passions through fasting and vigil, and adorned thyself with the beauty of the virtues, thou wast a habitation of the Holy Spirit, and now abidest in the heavenly mansions, praying for those who honor thee.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O holy hierarch, father Pitirim, joining chorus now with the angels in heaven, and standing with the choirs of the saints before the throne of the King of glory, pray thou for the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

O Pitirim our father, look down from heaven upon us on earth who have been beset by infirmities, and who honor now thy holy memory; and entreat the heavenly Father, that He turn us from our iniquities and lead us to a place of blessedness with thee.

Glory…, in the same tone —

Come, ye pious people, let us set forth a splendid feast; for Pitirim, the holy hierarch of God, standeth today before the throne of grace, healeth our infirmities, and prayeth for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, the choirs on high chant with us below, unceasingly glorifying Him Who was born of thee.

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV —

Teacher of faith and piety, beacon of the Church, example for monastics, O most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: Piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to Christ. Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, thou dost abide with us on earth in spirit, radiating miracles. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs…” —

A day of splendid festivity hath dawned! The angels join chorus in heaven; men rejoice on earth; and the whole assembly of the Church is glad, glorifying God Who is wondrous in His saints, Who hath revealed the holy hierarch Pitirim as a new wonderworker and intercessor for the Russian land. *Twice*

Rejoice, O land of Russia! Be glad, O city of Tambov! Adorn thyself, O assembly of the pious! For today the Master and Lord of all, our Savior, the heavenly High Priest, crowneth with an everlasting crown His faithful servant, the holy hierarch Pitirim, the good shepherd who prayeth fervently for his flock.

Come, O ye pious people, and behold a multitude of miracles today! By the mere invocation of the holy hierarch of God the afflicted recover their health, the demons are driven away, the sorrowful receive surcease, and the assembly of the faithful who have come together for his memorial is filled with joy.

And 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

Today the city of Tambov is glad as is meet, having the holy hierarch Pitirim as its helper, and with it the whole land of Russia rejoiceth in spirit; wherefore, O ye faithful, assembling to chant psalms and hymns, let us praise the all-wondrous Pitirim, the treasure of mercy and purity, the all-radiant beacon of the Church, the inexhaustible wellspring of miracles and dependable intercessor before God for those who honor his holy memory with faith and love. *Twice*

Thou wast shown to be a faithful keeper of the commandment of the Gospel not to lay up for thyself treasures upon the earth, O holy hierarch, wisely distributing thy possessions, building churches of God and monasteries, feeding the ­hungry and clothing the naked. Wherefore, He Who beggared Himself for our sake hath received thee into the eternal mansions. Him do thou entreat, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith and love honor thy holy memory.

In the throes of death thou didst utter a mighty cry unto the Lord, and in thy reverence thou wast heard; for Christ Himself appeared to thee on a cloud, indicating with His blessing that thou art His faithful servant and imparting healing unto thee. Him do thou beseech, O holy hierarch who didst behold God, that we also may meet Him on the clouds with all the saints when He shall come in glory to judge the whole world.

Glory…, in Tone V —

As in the days of the apostles the handkerchiefs and aprons of Paul wrought miracles, so today also the vestments of Pitirim, the holy hierarch of God, who was illumined with the spirit of the apostles, when placed upon the afflicted, impart the ability to walk unto the lame, the recovery of sight unto the blind, strength and power unto the paralyzed, consolation unto those who weep, hope to the despairing, and great mercy to all the faithful.

Now & ever…: the Dogmatic Theotokion in the same tone —

Once, the image of the Bride who knoweth not wedlock was inscribed in the Red Sea. There Moses was the parter of the waters; and here Gabriel is the minister of a miracle. There Israel traversed the deep dryshod; and now the Virgin giveth birth unto Christ without seed. The sea remained impassable after Israel had crossed; and the immaculate one remaineth incorrupt after the birth of Emmanuel. O God Who hast appeared as a man, Who existest and hast existed from the beginning: have mercy upon us!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. And Three readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera, in Tone III —

Today the multitude of the faithful join chorus: the company of hierarchs and priests, the assembly of monastics and laity, the elderly and children, the young and the widowed, literate and simple alike, glorify the Lord with mouth and heart, Who maketh manifest the new intercessor and wonderworker and granteth great mercy to the world.

Assembling today with faith and love, O brethren, let us praise the object of our festivity: Rejoice, O holy hierarch Pitirim, steadfast pillar of the Church! Rejoice, protector of the Russian land! Rejoice, splendid adornment of the city of Tambov! Rejoice, meek and merciful father! Rejoice, feeder of widows and orphans! Rejoice, speedy intercessor for the oppressed! Rejoice, healer of the sick who exactest no fee! Rejoice, O thou who prayest fervently for us all!

Glory…, in Tone IV —

Wondrous things are wrought today in the city of Tambov: the blind recover their sight, the lame walk again, the mute speak, the deaf hear, the paralyzed arise and the poor prosper through the intercession of the holy hierarch and wonderworker Pitirim; and they cry aloud and say: Glory to God our Savior!

Now & ever…, Theotokion, in the same tone —

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O venerable father Pitirim, who now dost hymn the Holy Trinity with the angels and the choirs of the saints, and in thy love hast not withdrawn from us: be thou mindful of the flock which thou didst gather together, O wise one, preserving it from the soul-destroying wolves, and invisibly leading it into the fold of the kingdom of heaven.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

In thy lifetime thou didst become a habitation of the Holy Spirit, O Pitirim our father, having first cleansed thyself by faith and love; and, standing now before the throne of Christ, the heavenly Master of the house, pray thou earnestly to Him, that He cleanse us of the passions which harm the soul and make His abode in our hearts with the Father and the Spirit, and lead us to the kingdom of heaven.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O Pitirim our father, honored scion of the city of Vyazma, transplanted by the right hand of God to the city of Tambov, watered by the grace of the Holy Spirit and adorned with the fruits of the virtues: pray for us to Christ God, that He not hew us down like the barren fig-tree, but cause us to dwell where shineth the light of His countenance.

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Open wide the gates of heaven, O ye princes! Ye angels, bow your heads! For the King of heaven and earth Himself cometh forth and leadeth into celestial glory His faithful servant, the venerable Pitirim, the good shepherd and divinely wise teacher who, during his life, acquired angelic purity by much sweat and toil, and who spurned the corruptible glory of the world and desired the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

After the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone IV —

Teacher of faith and piety, beacon of the Church, example for monastics, O most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: Piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to Christ. Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, thou dost abide with us on earth in spirit, radiating miracles. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice…”, once.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the holy hierarch, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VII —

As of old the ailing were healed by merely touching the hem of the robe of Christ, so now also the sick are cured when they touch the vestments wherein thou didst stand before the throne of grace, O hierarch of God, Pitirim our father. Wherefore, we glorify God and cry out to thee: Heal also our infirmities of soul and body, we pray thee, O holy one!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Mistress, thou art a rampart and shelter, a calm haven for all who find themselves amid tribulations and have recourse to thine aid with faith. Wherefore, we also cry out to thee with boldness: Save us from misfortune and sorrow, O merciful Mother!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II —

“I shall build My Church, and the gates of hades will not prevail against it,” Thou didst say to Thy disciples of old, O Savior; and now we see the fulfillment of these words. For when unbelief and superstition arose against Thy Church, Thou didst raise up a new wonderworker who confirmed the holy Faith by his pious life and many miracles and put its enemies to shame. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to Thee: Wondrous art Thou in Thy saints, O Lord!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

With the holy hierarch Pitirim do thou beseech Him to Whom thou didst seedlessly give birth through the Holy Spirit, that He make us steadfast in Orthodoxy and oneness of mind, O all-pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Pitirim, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV —

When thou wast set upon the candlestand of the Church of Tambov, thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, saving thy reason-endowed sheep, strengthening the weak, healing the infirm, setting aright those astray, and humbling the unruly by thy meekness. And now, O Pitirim our father, cease thou never to entreat Christ the Savior, that He grant to the pastors of the Church zeal and vigilance for souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, beseech thy Son and our God, that He cleanse us of our iniquities and grant the joy of salvation unto us who kiss the precious image of the venerable Pitirim and cry out: Glory to Thy condescension, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, §36 \[10:9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

With what hymns of praise shall we bless the holy hierarch Pitirim: the preserver of the Orthodox Faith and denouncer of unbelief, the champion of piety and fearsome reproof of iniquity, the guide of monks and laymen, the adornment of hierarchs and priests, for whose sake Christ granteth peace and great mercy unto the Russian land?

Canon of the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], in Tone VIII, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and 2 canons of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia —

Ode I

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

O Christ, Thou true Light, illumine mine understanding and cleanse my heart, that I may glorify the memory of Thy favored one, the God-bearing Pitirim.

O venerable father Pitirim, standing before the fiery throne in the highest, illumined with the radiance of the threefold Sun, illumine thou the abyss of mine evils, that I too may chant: For gloriously hath He been glorified!

As of old Moses the God-seer delivered Israel out of the hands of Pharaoh, so also do thou free me from slavery to the enemy, O God-bearing father, that, rejoicing, I may glorify God Who is wondrous in His saints.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, Mother of the Deliverer, by thine intercession entreat thy Son, that He destroy the sin which dwelleth within me and lead me forth into the freedom of the glory of His children.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone VIII —

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Standing before the face of God in light unapproachable, O divinely wise and holy hierarch, illumine the darkness of our souls, and grant us utterance, that, rejoicing, we may praise thy memory, O most blessed one.

From thy youth didst thou subject thy carnal-mindedness to thy spirit, O venerable one, and, clothed in dispassion, thou wast shown to be a chosen vessel of the grace of the priesthood and a true shepherd for thy flock. Pray thou, O father, that we be saved.

Thy life was blameless, and thy repose is with the saints, O father; and thy memory is celebrated with hymns of praise. Pray thou to Christ in our behalf, asking that which is profitable for us; for the effective prayer of the righteous man is able to accomplish much.

*Theotokion:* The threefold waves of evil thoughts and passions and the abyss of sins have engulfed my wretched soul. Extend unto me a helping hand, O Virgin Theotokos, thou refuge of the faithful.

Katavasia: I shall open my mouth…

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

As the righteous Hannah of old gave up her child, so didst thou give thyself as a gift to God, O father Pitirim. Establish me also upon the rock of His commandments, that I may cry: None is as holy as our God!

By thy supplications, O father Pitirim, establish our mind and heart in the Lord; and exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, that the mouths of the enemies of the Faith may be shut, and we may rejoice in our salvation.

On the feast of the new wonderworker let not the mighty one boast in his strength, nor let the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor yet the rich man boast in his wealth, but let him boast who boasteth of understanding and knowing the Lord and acquiring the riches of His grace.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, Mother who knewest not wedlock: By the grace of thy Son show forth my barren soul as fruitful, through the supplications of the new wonderworker Pitirim, that I also may cry out with all the faithful: None is as holy as our God!

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Emulating John the Almsgiver, O venerable one, in thy life thou didst show thyself to be merciful to those in need and wast a true father unto the poor; and, dwelling now in the highest, be thou merciful unto us who call thee blessed.

Of old many of the sick who touched the garments of Christ became well; and now those who place the vestments of the holy hierarch upon themselves and touch them for a blessing receive healing of all manner of ailments. Wherefore, O brethren, in accordance with the Gospel let us glorify God Who hath given such authority unto men.

As thou wast a good helmsman of the ship of Christ’s Church, O father, deliver thy flock from the tempest of sins, tribulations and sorrows, guiding us to the calm haven of the will of God.

*Theotokion:* With hymns let us honor the all-pure Mother and Virgin through whom heaven and the courts of the Lord have been opened unto men, chanting: There is none as pure as thee, O all-pure one, and none more immaculate than thee, O Mistress!

Sessional hymn, in Tone II —

Even though thy body descended beneath the earth, yet hath it shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds, emitting rays of grace. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we fervently entreat thee as our common father. From misfortunes and grievous circumstances deliver all who honor thee!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, taking Pitirim as thy fellow suppliant, entreat Him to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant us remission of transgressions and correction of life, that we may ever hymn thee who hast magnified our race.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

From thy youth thou didst emulate the angels in the virginal purity of thy life, didst serve unto the salvation of men, O father Pitirim, and didst cry out to God, saying: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Like an angel in the flesh thou didst burn with the life of love for Christ, O holy one, and didst illumine with the knowledge of the Son of God the people entrusted to thee, who cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O earthly angel and heavenly man, ask salvation for us sinners from Christ God, that we also may cry out with thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* O Mother of the Word and Virgin, preserve us from ignominious passions, that we may chant unto Christ Who dwelleth within us: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Canon II

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

We who find ourselves amid sorrows have acquired thee as a most fervent intercessor for us and a most ready helper, O father; for thou preservest from every evil not only the people of thy flock in thy city, but also those afar off who invoke thy name.

Thou didst desire Christ alone, and wast wholly Christ-like, O venerable one. Him didst thou unwaveringly follow in thy life; Him didst thou strive to reach. Wherefore, having now found the One desired by thee, by thy supplications join us to the flock of the elect.

As a faithful servant of the Holy Trinity, illumine my wretched soul with the three divine virtues — faith, hope and love — and vouchsafe that I may behold the Triune God in the age to come.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth unto the Lord, the Joy of the world, O most lauded Virgin, make us partakers of the joy of heaven, that we may cry out to thee with the voice of the archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

O Lord Who hast illumined the whole universe with Thy light, enlighten my darkness and dispel the gloom of my soul, on the honored day of the commemoration of Thy favorite Pitirim.

As thou art the lamp of the Sun of righteousness, ever illumined with never-waning light, O Pitirim our father, shed light upon our mind and heart, that, rejoicing, we may chant unto our Savior: We know none other God than Thee!

What shall we offer Thee, O Christ our Savior! What hymns shall we chant unto Thy compassion? For Thou hast shone forth upon us the light of salvation and deliverance from our iniquities, through the many miracles of the holy hierarch Pitirim.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, holy Mother who gavest birth unto the Light unapproachable: disdain not the entreaties of thine unworthy children who languish in the darkness of sin, but illumine us with the light of the knowledge of God, that, rising early, we may glorify thee.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Foreseeing the beauty of thy soul, Christ, the Chief Shepherd, showed thee forth as a good shepherd and excellent teacher for His flock; wherefore, He hath received thee into His heavenly bridal-chamber with the holy hierarchs whose life thou didst wisely emulate. With them, therefore, pray in the heavens for us all.

Bodily infirmities assail us, and tribulations surround us on every side. Wherefore, rescue us from them by thy supplications, O holy hierarch; for thee do we have as a divinely given physician amid our ailments and a comforter amid sorrows.

Having kept the commandments of Christ and taught them to thy flock, thou art fittingly called great in the kingdom of heaven. Haste thou, O father, and lead us also into the courts of the Lord; for we are thy children and the sheep of thy reason-endowed flock.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, glory of those in heaven and joy of those on earth: As thou art a Queen, with all the saints pray thou unceasingly for us to thy Son; for on thee, after God, have we set all our hope.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

The abyss of mine evils troubleth me and doth drag me down into the depths of despair. But do Thou, O God, as the unfathomable Abyss of mercy, extend to me a helping hand, as Thou didst to Peter, through the intercession of Thy merciful favorite Pitirim, and save me.

O Lord, Abyss of mercy and compassion: take pity on us, Thy fallen creation; still the waves of our passions, and lead us to the harbor of salvation, through the entreaties of the holy hierarch Pitirim.

O Pitirim our father, faithful servant of the merciful God: entreat His beneficence, that by the judgments He knoweth, He may save us who are perishing and show us almighty aid through thine intercession.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Mistress, Mother of mercy: the enemies of our Faith have surrounded us, and, as there is none to help us, we are perishing; for torrents of iniquities have overcome us, and we are in despair. But in thy maternal compassion do thou incline thy Son to mercy, that He may save us from misfortunes, as He did Jonah from the whale.

Canon II

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

O good shepherd who instructest the people of Christ with divine teachings and dost edify them with the virtues of thy soul: Leave us not to perish in our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted as a man therein, help us now who are tempted.

O great wonder! The tomb of the holy hierarch is become a common hospital for all, truly accessible and free of charge. Come, ye people, and with fear and faith freely receive health for your souls and bodies, glorifying the Lord and blessing His favored one.

Be thou an aid to thy city, O holy father, and with thine invincible intercession protect our whole country, that we may all cry out to thee with gladness: Rejoice, O ever-memorable Pitirim, thou boast of Tambov!

*Theotokion:* Beneath thy shelter all mortals flee, O Mistress, and we cry out to thee with compunctionate souls: by thine almighty mediation, O Mother of God, render Christ our God, to Whom thou gavest birth in all-pure manner, merciful unto us.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII —

Assembling together, let us hymn Pitirim: the excellent instructor of monks, the holy hierarch merciful to all men, the all-wondrous worker of miracles, the tireless intercessor for us, the boast of the land of Tambov.

*Ikos:* O ye faithful, in hymns and spiritual songs let us hymn today the great and holy hierarch: Rejoice, O God-bearing father Pitirim, thou all-honored scion of the land of Smolensk, who by the grace of God wast planted in the city of Vyazma and blossomed like a lily, enriching the region of Tambov with the fruits of the virtues; rejoice, good pastor who didst illumine the darkness of ungodliness with the light of piety and by the planting of the true Faith! Rejoice, thou who didst convert many of the unbelieving and lead them to Christ through thy salvific labors and struggles; rejoice, thou who didst leave to the city of Tambov as a legacy a miraculous icon of the Mother of God through which divers healings have poured forth! Rejoice, thou who with thine own hands didst dig a well of ever-abundant water, through which they who drink thereof receive healing of infirmities and release from soul-destroying passions; rejoice, thou who didst make fragrant the vales and forests of Tambov by thy visitation with thy friends, the holy hierarch Metrophanes and the God-loving Basil! Rejoice, thou who didst thereby make a beginning for the monastic life in that place, and didst set an example of true friendship for those who live in the world! Rejoice, thou boast of the land of Tambov!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O Lord our God, ineffable Love, Thou hast adorned man, made of dust, with Thine image beyond gold and silver, and hast enriched him with all manner of gifts and many miracles. Wherefore, celebrating the memory of Thy wonderworker Pitirim, we cry out to Thee: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O venerable father Pitirim, having cleansed the image of thy Creator in thy soul from the passions, aflame with the love of God thou didst commit thyself to the service of His will, ever crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Like the pious youths in Babylon of old, thou didst establish the true Faith in the region of Tambov and didst denounce impiety, O father Pitirim, ever laboring, preaching the Gospel, praying and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Mistress and Theotokos, thou didst give thy precious image to the city of Tambov as a blessing and mighty protection, through the hands of the holy hierarch Pitirim, that through thee we may glorify Christ our mighty God.

Canon II

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst exercise diligent care for thy flock, guiding all well to the path of salvation by thy life and word. Wherefore, as a compassionate shepherd, do thou now seek out me, thy lamb, who am lost in the ways of perdition and cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

The words of the Lord, that the pure of heart shall see God, have been fulfilled in thee, O holy father; for with the eyes of thy body thou didst behold Christ the Savior, Who hearkened to thy supplication when thou didst cry out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

At the site of thy feats of prayer thou didst dig a well of grace-filled water, from whence reverent people draw off the healing of their infirmities if they ask thine aid and repent, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Wake thou from the sleep of sin, O my wretched soul, and cry out to the only helper of all: O Mother and Virgin, by thy supplications save me and vouchsafe the portion of the elect unto me who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O Lord my God, Who of old transformed the flames of fire into dew for the pious youths, quench Thou the flame of my passions with the dew of the supplications of the pious and holy hierarch Pitirim, that with him I also may exalt Thee for all ages.

O Pitirim our father, with the torrents of thy tears thou didst extinguish the fiery temptations of the passions and lusts of the flesh, and in thy pure heart thou didst ever dance as in a meadow, chanting: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

Standing now in thy pure and God-loving soul with the angels before the fiery throne of God, illumined with the never-waning beams emitted therefrom, and shining upon us with many miracles, O father Pitirim, enlighten the darkness of unbelief and superstition which surroundeth us, that we may hymn and bless God, Who is wondrous in His saints, forever.

*Theotokion:* Consumed by the passions as by a fiery furnace, I cry to thee, prodigal that I am: O pure Mistress, Mother of the Almighty, save and deliver me from fiery damnation!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst present the icon of the Mother of God to thy city, O father, as a sanctification, protection and defense, which hath been shown to be a source of grace-bearing healings and a mighty shield against all dangers for those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou art a swiftly responding helper amid sorrows and sickness, O venerable one, for those who invoke thee with faith, manifesting thyself to some in dreams, clearly appearing before others, and doing good secretly to yet others who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Rising from thy tomb, thou didst manifestly appear to the sacrilegious temple robber in thy church, O holy hierarch, calling him to repentance with an awesome admonition. Pray thou who, before the end, repentance also be given to us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* All generations of men call thee blessed, for without father thou didst give birth in the flesh to the Son Who before time began was the Son of God begotten without mother. To Him do we cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

O Word of the unoriginate Father, only-begotten Son: Desiring to renew fallen man, thou didst manifest Thyself as the Son of the Virgin; and assuming the sins of the whole world, Thou didst take up the Cross, and from thence hast gathered the scattered children of God with Thine outstretched arms. Wherefore, bound by the bond of Thy love today, we magnify Thy wondrous favorite Pitirim and her who gave birth unto Thee.

Emulating the incarnate Son of God, thou didst humble thyself more than others, O venerable father Pitirim. Wherefore, thou hast acquired the love of God and hast led the lost children of God to the heavenly Father, to glorify His compassion.

Full of the love of Christ, O Pitirim our father, thou didst teach thy flock with thy word and life, to look after the orphaned, to feed the poor and to console the sorrowful. Beseech Christ the Savior, that on this day of thy commemoration we may adorn ourselves with compassion and almsgiving, as beloved children of God.

*Theotokion:* O holy Mother, Virgin who knew not man, who in thy womb didst unite God and man in one: grant that we who are scattered may be united in the one Christ, thy Son, on Whom the Church hath been founded which magnifieth thee.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Aflame with pastoral zeal, other sheep, not of thy flock, didst thou lead to Christ, rebuking the heretics and illumining the unbelieving with the light of the knowledge of God, that, in the words of the Savior, there may be one flock and one Shepherd.

Earnestly do we entreat thee as a heavenly physician who hath received from the Lord the gift of healing, O holy hierarch: With the heavenly treatment of thy prayers heal thou the cruel afflictions of our souls and bodies.

Disdain not this the hymn of thanksgiving of thy children, O favorite of God, but accept it in thy compassion and offer it to the Creator of all, that He may be merciful to those who honor thee.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, save thy servants from misfortune, and free them from the passions, through the supplications of thy holy hierarch Pitirim; for all who grieve have thee as an unassailable rampart, in that thou hast given birth to our salvation.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars…” —

He Who established the lights in the heavens hath revealed thee to His Church as a new and most radiant star, illumining us with the splendor of the Spirit and the brilliance of miracles, and putting the ungodly to shame, O holy hierarch, father Pitirim, our ever-vigilant intercessor.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-pure Mother who gavest birth to the ineffable Light: Show us to be children of the Light, and vouchsafe that we may behold the blessedness of heaven, that, rejoicing, we may cry out with thee and the venerable Pitirim: O Christ our God, Bestower of light, glory be to Thee!

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone III —

Come, all ye nations! Understand ye a mystery of our Faith! Pitirim, the holy hierarch of God, the preserver of spiritual gifts, who hath departed bodily into the earth, remaineth even today with the faithful through the spirit of Christ’s love and joyfully saveth from every misfortune, working divers wonders: by the mere invocation of his name raising those who suffer from grievous afflictions up healthy from their beds, strengthening the doubting in the Faith, correcting those in error, saving those who are in danger of drowning during their travels, that they may ever thank God Who is beneficent unto them and glorify His new favorite and wonderworker Pitirim. *Twice*

O divinely blessed father Pitirim, spurning all the beauties of this world and loving the law of God, thou didst lay waste to thy flesh by fasting and the keeping of vigils, didst adorn thyself with humility and meekness, patience and love, and didst live angelically upon the earth. Wherefore, thou hast shone forth in many miracles as a most brilliant beacon, and hast been shown to be wellspring of the great gifts of God. Entreat the Lord Who hath glorified thee, that He illumine the darkness of our sins and iniquities and grant peace and great mercy to the land of Russia.

O God-bearing father Pitirim, ascending the mountain of exalted virtues bearing God within thy soul as in a temple, thou didst lead thy flock up from earth to heaven with the teachings of the commandments of Christ as by a ladder. Wherefore, thou didst found monastic communities and didst adorn the churches of God with all magnificence, and didst teach those who pray therein. By thy supplications make us also temples of the Holy Spirit, in that thou art our intercessor, O great Pitirim.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks and a great assembly of the people, and we glorify thee as a divinely wise teacher, O Pitirim our father; for during thy lifetime thou didst diligently guide all on the path of salvation, and now in thy love thou dost embrace all and pourest forth streams of divine mercy upon those who with faith approach thy precious and much-healing tomb. Pray for us, O most sacred father, that we may be counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven, where thou shinest forth in glory unwaning.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the holy hierarch; and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto Me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335

\[Heb. 13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \(Lk. 6: 17-23\)

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

