The 29th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Callinicus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O divinely wise martyr Callinicus, piously desiring to die rather than live, thou didst truly present an image of the death of Christ; wherefore thou hast received immortality and unfading blessedness; and, rejoicing, thou hast made thine abode, O glorious one, where the ranks of the angels and athletes dwell.

A light emitting healing, a river full of true gifts, a treatment which costeth nought, a vessel of sanctity hath the shrine of thy relics been shown to us; wherefore let us who approach with faith draw forth ever-living health, O glorious martyr, for whose sake we glorify our wondrous God.

O all-blessed martyr Callinicus, possessing the invisible God as an invincible aid against the invisible foe, thou didst raise the standard of immortality; and having felled him who boasted that he would destroy the earth, thou didst drown him in the streams of thy blood by the throes of thy sufferings.

Glory…, in the same tone —

With hymns let us honor today the wondrous Callinicus, the champion of piety and destroyer of the enemy, the converser with martyrs, who was a temple of the Holy Spirit, the warrior of Christ God, the truly inexhaustible treasury of healings, the confirmation of the faithful.

Now & ever…: Theotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

The preëternal God Who took flesh of thy blood showed thee forth, O pure one, as an intercessor for men. Wherefore, deliver thy servants from every misfortune and evil circumstance, and from the snares of the wicked foe; and vouchsafe that all who glorify and bow down to thee may partake of the splendor of the elect.

Stavrotheotokion —

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Lifted up upon the Tree, Thou diest, granting life unto all, O Thou Who sustainest all creation!” weeping, the Theotokos said when she beheld suspended upon the Cross the God and man Who had shone forth from her ineffably.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Callinicus received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tormenters and set at nought the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

AT MATINS

Both canons from the Octoechos, and this canon for the martyr, in Tone IV —

Ode I

*Irmos:* He Who is mighty in battle cast the chariots of Pharaoh and his power into the sea. Let us chant a new hymn, for He hath been glorified!

Having truly mounted the noetic chariot, thou didst drown the captains of the noetic Egypt in the streams of thy blood, O Callinicus, boast of martyrs.

Clothed in divine vesture, O all-blessed and wise one, thou didst divest thyself of earthly garments, and didst hasten to the contest and put the enemy to shame.

Having broken the subtle snares of the enemy with the bonds of thy suffering, thou didst cast him, helpless, to the ground, O Callinicus, and didst trample him under thy feet.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin Mother, we know thee to be her who gave birth unto God, whom the choir of the prophets foresaw as the portal of heaven and the bush unburnt.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord Who dost establish the thunder and formest the wind: make me steadfast, that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; for none is as holy as Thee, O our God.

Wounded with the love of Christ, the martyr cried out, enduring pain amid his struggles: “I make haste to the sweet fragrance of myrrh, following Thy Passion, through the suffering of my blood!”

Thou wast preserved unassailed by the darts of the serpent; for the crafty one, having bruised thy heel amid thy wounds, crushed his own head in thy sufferings, O Callinicus.

Having cut down the thorns of deception with the sword of the Spirit, thou didst truly offer unto thy Master the fruit of the Christian Faith, O most blessed one: thy hundredfold pangs.

*Theotokion:* In thy womb thou alone didst conceive as the ineffable Offspring of thy birthgiving God the Word, Who existed before thee, O Mother; and with milk thou didst nourish as a babe Him Who is without beginning, O all-pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…” —

Having divine zeal within thy soul, O glorious one, thou didst steadfastly denounce those who vainly worked iniquity; and having drawn nigh unto torments, thou didst pass through thy struggle with valiant mind. O martyr Callinicus, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Without being separated from the divine nature, yet becoming flesh within thy womb, the one Lord remained God and man, Who after thy birthgiving preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, all-immaculate, as thou wast before giving birth. Him do we earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion —

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him hanging upon the Cross Who had come forth from her without pain, cried aloud, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I heard report of Thee, O God, and I was afraid; I understood Thy works, O Lord, and I was filled with awe, for the earth is full of Thy praise.

Washed in the streams of thy blood, O all-blessed one, thou wast revealed as most pure by the Spirit, and hast attained unto the delight of the incorporeal ones, O martyr Callinicus.

Thou wast truly set as a stone precious to the Church, and didst shake the temples of the idols and cast them down to the ground by the steadfast opposition of thy sufferings.

The deadly blandishments of the enemy didst thou truly turn aside with the words of the Spirit, O martyr; and, strengthened in thy soul, thou didst win the victory over deception.

*Theotokion:* We now recognize thee, O pure one, as the bush which the great Moses beheld prophetically on Sinai, burning without being consumed, bearing Fire within thy womb.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Shine forth upon me the light of Thy precepts, O Lord, for my spirit riseth early unto Thee and hymneth Thee: for Thou art our God, and I flee to Thee, O King of peace.

Foundering in the quicksand and abyss of my sins and having fallen into the tempest of mine evil deeds, I cry to thee: Be thou my helper!

When the soles of thy feet were pierced with nails, O martyr, thou didst sing: “In the path of Thy testimonies have I richly delighted, enduring wounds in the expectation of reward, O Master, Thou Judge of the contest!”

Having traded well in torment, thou didst trim thy lamp with the oil of mercy, O all-blessed one; wherefore, thou didst become a wholly unblemished sacrifice, an acceptable whole-burnt offering.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou art the subject of the prophets’ proclamation, the boast of the angels and the adornment of martyrs, bearing the divine Word, Who was ineffably begotten of the Father before time began, O all-pure one.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beset by the storm of sin, and held fast within the belly of the monster, with the prophet I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O Lord, and save me!

The fold of thy flock hath been preserved unharmed by the beasts of heresy; for the stout staff of thy sufferings, which thou didst hold fast, O glorious one, hath been shown to drive wolves away.

Thou didst escape the night of deception by thy suffering, and the beauty of faith shone forth like the sun upon the ends of the earth in thy confession.

As a renowned preacher of the Faith, thou didst readily cry out to the iniquitous one: “Why threatenest thou one whose spiritual strength is not weak? For the darts of the ungodly are feeble!”

*Theotokion:* As before thy birthgiving, O thou who hast not known wedlock, thou remainest incorrupt and virginal; for in thee is known the mystery which passeth understanding and recounting, O Bride of God.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…” —

The beautiful things of heaven hast thou now inherited as is meet; for, greatly aflame with the love of Christ, thou didst manfully brave the fire therewith, O Callinicus. Standing now before Him, cease not to pray in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Burning in the furnace, the fire quaked with fear; and the children were bedewed and said, chanting: Blessed art Thou, Who alone existest, O God of our fathers!

“The terrors of torments are for me the means whereby I may obtain delight; for neither fire nor wounds will separate me from Him Who truly loveth me!” cried the martyr.

Strengthened by the support of Christ, O glorious one, contending, thou didst cast the adversary down to the ground; and, true to thy name, thou didst show thyself to be the goodly victor over the tyrant.

Thou didst put the devil to shame and didst gladden the angels with thy sufferings, O glorious one; and thou didst cry out to Christ: Blessed art Thou alone, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O all-pure Virgin, thou didst annul the curse of Eve our first mother; for thou art the Mother of the Master of all, who hast mediated joy for all.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Master Who hast created all things in Thy wisdom, Thou hast established the earth as a weight upon the deep, planting its foundation upon the boundless waters. Wherefore, we all cry out, chanting: Bless the Lord unceasingly, O ye works of the Lord!

Rejoice, O delight of true athletes! Rejoice, adornment and ornament of the Faith! Rejoice, torchbearer most splendid among the martyrs, who hast dispelled deception and shone forth light upon the world by thy suffering, O most wise Callinicus.

The tyrant was put to shame by thy struggles and opposition, and the malefactors were vanquished by thy wounds, O blessed one. Thy heels were pierced with nails. All deception was consumed, and the temples of the idolaters were destroyed, by the fire of thy contest.

Bowing thy head, O Callinicus, in thy boldness pray unceasingly to God in behalf of those who honor thee. Intercede for thy flock, rescuing it from the divers snares of the deceiver, and make it steadfast by faith. For through thee doth it grow in stature and might.

*Theotokion:* In the Spirit, the prophets perceived thee, the Virgin, as tabernacle and altar, jar and lamp-stand, the all-holy mountain, the cloud and the tables of the law, the ark and the staff, the divine portal whereby the ancient paradise is made accessible unto all men.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ our God, to Whom thou gavest birth without seed, O pure Theotokos, do we magnify with unceasing hymns.

A robe of faith was woven for thee on high, whereby thou didst strip the enemy naked at the tribunal, O glorious martyr.

The tyrant thought to seduce the martyr with blandishments, but the martyr remained steadfast in the Faith.

O glorious Callinicus, thou didst offer thyself unto God as a pure whole-burnt offering and a pleasing sacrifice on the fire of thy contest.

Beautiful are thy feet, O athlete Callinicus, which, though pierced with nails, went on to preach God.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, we have acquired thee as our protection and refuge, our rampart and bulwark, our ever firm hope amid tribulations.

