The 30th Day of the Month of July

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles Silas & Silvanus, and Those with Them

\(for this day we also provide the services in honor of St. John the Warrior, and St. Germanus of Solovki\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign...” —

Illumined with divine splendors, the apostles passed over the world, like winged eagles, driving away the darkness of polytheism, and making all sons and heirs of the day. Wherefore, we reverence you, and honor your holy and right eminent feast, venerating your relics.

In sacred manner let us bless Silas and Andronicus, Silvanus and Crescens, and with praises let us honor the wondrous Epenetus today with joyful heart, for they are disciples and preachers of the Lord by whom we have been delivered from the vanity of idolatry, and have been piously taught the radiance of the Trinity.

Christ sent you to all the world to cleanse away the mire of wickedness, O apostles, and to restore souls wounded by soul-destroying poison and bring them to perfect health. Wherefore, we honor you as all-praised benefactors and all-wise physicians and instruments of the Spirit.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion —

Rejoice, O ray of sun-like brilliance, throne of the never-waning Sun, who shone forth the ineffable Sun! Rejoice, mind radiant with divine splendors, bolt of lightning who hast illumined the ends of the earth, true luster of gold, O most good and all-immaculate one who hast caused the never-setting Light to shine upon the faithful!

Stavrotheotokion —

Seeing Christ slain Who slayeth the deceiver, the all-pure Mistress exclaimed, crying out bitterly to Him Who came forth from her womb; and, marvelling at His longsuffering, she cried aloud: O my Child most beloved, forget not Thine handmaid! O Thou Who lovest mankind, my consolation, tarry not!

Troparion, in Tone III —

O holy apostles, entreat ye the merciful God, that He grant our souls remission of transgressions.

At Matins

The canon of the holy apostles, in Tone II:

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord Who by His divine command dried up the impassable and turbulent sea, and guided the people of Israel across it on foot, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Ever standing before the divine throne, illumined with never-waning radiance, O saints, ask ye of the Father of lights, that He send down spiritual enlightenment upon all of us who faithfully honor you.

Beholding the Sun of righteousness Who shone forth from the divine Virgin, O glorious ones, ye cleaved unto Him, becoming light through divine communion; and ye drove away all the gloom of falsehood.

Bearing the divine law upon your tongue, ye traversed all the earth, taking away its iniquity, O wise Crescens and Andronicus, Silas and Silvanus, and sowing the word of salvation.

Let us praise the glorious Epenetus, who was the divine boast of Carthage and a disciple of the Word, a wellspring of healings, a great preacher of things past understanding, and the confirmation of the Faith.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth ineffably unto the all-hymned God Who, in His goodness, arrayed Himself in flesh which He took from thee, O all-hymned and pure one. Wherefore, as of old thou didst foretell, we hymn and bless thee with thankful voices.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having preached the incarnation of the Master and loosed the bonds of wickedness, O wise and great preachers, ye loosed those who of old were bound with unbelief, and led them to God through faith.

As lamps of the never-waning radiance, ye drove away the darkness of ungodliness, showing the light of knowledge to men, O all-praised ones. Wherefore, ye are ever blessed.

Unto all the earth hath the divine proclamation of the apostles gone forth, as David doth sing, and it teacheth the suffering and resurrection of the Savior, whereby we have all risen from graves of vanity.

*Theotokion:* He Who is Light unapproachable found thee to be higher in honor than the angels, O Theotokos, and entered into thy holy womb; and He showed Himself to be a man incarnate of thee, known in two natures.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Of the divine Faith...” —

As divine embers kindled by the fervor of the Comforter, O all-praised apostles, ye dispelled the gloom of ungodliness and warmed the faithful in sacred manner. Wherefore, honoring your memory today, we ask to receive great mercy.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion —

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O thou who alone art the all-pure Mother and Virgin, who surpassest the angels in purity; with the divine water of thy prayers cleanse me who, more than all others, am dirt, defiled by carnal transgressions, and grant me great mercy, O pure one.

Stavrotheotokion —

The undefiled ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprung forth from her without pain suspended on the Cross, lamenting maternally cried out: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the dishonor of the passions?

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

Traversing the whole world with the might of Him Who created all things, like winged birds, ye saved those who were in the abyss of evils, O God-bearers, and guided the unfortunate to the calm harbor.

Giving strength to the paralyzed through the word of thought, O glorious Silas, with the preacher Paul thou didst traverse the whole world, inundated by many trials and showing thyself to the faithful as a rescuer.

Adorned with great grace, with Paul thou didst pass from the East to the West like a beam of light, O all-wise Silas, as effulgences of the Sun, and ye illumined the hearts of the gentiles.

Let Crescens and Andronicus be praised, and let Silvanus be magnified today with Silas; let Epenetus also be lauded: for they are all clusters on the vine of Christ, pouring forth the sweetness of salvation.

*Theotokion:* The wonder which came to pass within thee was the most transcendent of wonders, for, surpassing the laws of nature, thou gavest birth unto Christ the Giver of the law, Who remitteth the crime of the first-created, O all-immaculate one.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Exalted far above the heavens is the majesty of Thy disciples who preached on earth Thy glorious advent, sufferings and resurrection, O Word of God, Jesus all-good.

Now let us praise the wise Silas, the luminous and all-radiant vessel of the Comforter, the instruction of the erring, the all-glorious boast of Thessalonica, the adornment of the apostles.

Made strong, in accordance with thy name, by the alliance of the Word, O all-wise Andronicus, thou didst go forth, strengthening hearts weakened by the temptations of the adversary, and guiding them to the knowledge of God.

*Theotokion:* David described thee beforehand as the mountain of curds, the mountain of our God, the rich mountain; for in thee, O Maiden, didst thou come to know the ways of Him Who beggared Himself in assuming the flesh and hath elevated us to our former blessedness.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* From the belly of the sea monster, Jonah cried out: Lead me up from the abyss of hell, I pray, that with a spirit of truth and in a voice of praise I may sacrifice to Thee, as to my Deliverer!

Raised up to the Lord through pure actions, O wise ones, ye drew those who had fallen down into the pit of destruction up to the heavenly heights of exalted vision and activity.

Having preached the Unity of Essence, the Trinity of Persons, to the ends of the earth, O divinely blessed ones, ye utterly destroyed the gloom of polytheism and were shown to be lamps for men’s souls.

Enlivening thy mind with the anointing of joy, Christ showed thee forth piously as His disciple, the first pastor of Chalcedon, who showest the path to those who are astray, O all-wise Crescens.

*Theotokion:* The Creator found thee to be comely in beauty, and made His abode within thee, O all-holy and most laudable Virgin; and He showed Himself to be incarnate, more comely than all the sons of the earthborn.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...” —

Ye were shown to be branches of the vine of Christ, bearing clusters of the virtues, pouring forth upon us the wine of salvation, O wise ones, which receiving, we are filled with gladness, celebrating your most honored memory, whereon pray ye, O apostles of the Lord, for the remission of our sins.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The youths of old showed themselves to be rhetors with the greatest love of wisdom; for, theologizing with their lips, they chanted from the depths of their God-pleasing souls: O most divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Together let us hymn Silas and Silvanus, the vessels which contained the grace of the Comforter, which destroyed the receptacles of the delusions of the past, and made them acceptable unto God.

No one is able to praise the wondrous Epenetus, for he transformed himself for Christ, accepting suffering for His sake; and, having contended well, he hath won a share in His kingdom.

With divine hymns let Crescens be praised, who revealed the hidden paths of Christ, who with his own flesh condemned sin and showed forth many as uncondemned.

*Theotokion:* By thy mediation loose the bonds of my transgressions, O pure one, and to the perfect love of thy good Son do thou bind me, who ever withdraw myself from Him by my wicked pleasures.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Refusing to obey the edict of the tyrant, the three venerable children were cast into the furnace, and confessed God, chanting: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Ye gave no sleep to your eyes, O vigilant servants of the Word, until ye had delivered the faithful from the heavy sleep of falsehood and made them children of the light and the day.

As chariots of God, O glorious apostles, ye took on Him Who steereth you on the heavenly course, crushing all the weaponry of deception.

Let the all-wise Silas be rightly praised as a minister of Christ, and with him let Crescens and Andronicus, the beacons which enlightened all the nations, be glorified with faith.

*Trinitarian:* Let us hymn the life-creating Trinity which is composed of Hypostases and is understood to be of a single Essence; and, chanting, let us say: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thee do we magnify, O blessed and most pure Theotokos, who through thy virginal womb ineffably didst make God incarnate, the Luminary Who shone forth before the sun and hath come to us in the flesh.

Saving physicians of souls and bodies were ye. Ye heal the infirm with spiritual remedies and show forth a twofold health, O divinely radiant apostles. Wherefore, ye are blessed as is meet.

Ye were shown to be as embers ignited by the fervor of the Spirit, and ye melted the ice of ­falsehood and warmed frozen hearts by faith; and ye lead all to the spring of salvation, O all-wise ones.

In the house of our God let us join chorus, glorifying Silvanus, Silas and Andronicus, the great Epenetus and the most wise Crescens, as true preachers who pray for us.

Your truly sacred and right laudable memory, holy and full of the gifts of the divine Spirit, illumining the fullness of the pious with beams of divine activity, compelleth us to hymn you, O wise ones.

*Theotokion:* Through the entreaties of her who knew not wedlock, who gave birth to Thee, O almighty Master, Who shalt come again in the glory of Thy divinity to judge the whole world, take pity on me, and send me not into the fire condemned by my transgressions.

