Also on The 30th Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr John the Warrior

AT VESPERS

We chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…” —

When on earth thou wast a soldier of a corrupt king, thou wast a warrior faithful to God, O John, and then, receiving help from Christ the King, aiding the martyrs of Christ thou didst vanquish the enemy, visible and invisible; and now thou joinest chorus with the angelic hosts and the armies on high. Wherefore, O blessed passion-bearer, pray thou to the Savior of us all, that He save our souls. *Twice*

Desiring to leave the earthly army, thou didst take care to please Christ the King of heaven; for, having armed thyself with faith in Him, thou wast found to be a mighty warrior, O John, protecting the martyrs of Christ from the ungodly tyrant by thy prayers to God, O blessed one.

When by faith in Christ and by prayer thou didst desire to obtain the portion of the righteous, thou didst then aid those persecuted for their faith in Christ. Therefore, Christ the Lord hath enriched thee with gifts of miracles; for unto those who call upon thee amid divers tribulations thou showest thyself to be a speedy helper. Wherefore, pray thou unto God in behalf of us who observe thy most honored memorial.

And 4 stichera, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise…” —

Come, ye who love what is holy, let us all be glad in spirit and hold festival, glorifying Christ our God, for today He hath prepared a banquet for us, the memorial of the glorious martyr and valiant warrior John, a helper for all amid tribulations, denouncer of evil deeds and revealer of lost and hidden things for those who call upon his assistance. *Twice*

O all-blessed and right victorious John, mighty warrior of our God, the Creator of all, as one chosen by God thou didst preserve thy nobility of soul; and having disdained the vanity and deceptions of the world, thou didst lovingly show sympathy for those in torment. And now thou abidest sweetly with Christ in the heavens, from whence look thou down upon and preserve all who call upon thee in time of battle and all manner of misfortunes.

What shall we offer unto Thee, O God our Creator? What manner of thanks shall we give Thee? For Thou hast given Thy people true grace, the holy John, a pious warrior and bestower of alms, a helper of soldiers in battle, a consoler of griefs, who prayeth fervently to Thee for our salvation. Wherefore, for the sake of Thy mercy, save us, O Master Who lovest mankind!

Glory…, in Tone VI —

Having struggled zealously for Christ, O John, with the Christian martyrs, helping Christians in the pious faith, thou wast an exemplary soldier of thy Master. Feeding the needy and preparing abundant alms for the poor, thou didst reject the edicts of the iniquitous Emperor Julian; and, destroying the vessels of His tyranny, thou wast shown to be a victor excellent in thine Orthodoxy. Wherefore, thou hast passed over to the mansions of heaven, and there dost most joyously behold Christ, Who hath crowned thee with an imperishable crown. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, O most blessed one, that they who honor thee be counted worthy of everlasting blessedness.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone —

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the martyr, in Tone VIII —

O all-praised John, martyr of Christ, thou didst count as nought a violent death and the assaults of the wicked and tyrannical emperor, having right boldly armed thyself for combat with manly wisdom. Wherefore, crowned with the glory of victory, thou hast been numbered among all the righteous; and, praising thee with them, we call thee blessed.

O all-blessed John, martyr of Christ, seeing the martyrs of Christ led to the slaughter, thou didst aid them with fraternal love. For, exhorting them to suffer even to the shedding of their blood and unto death, thou didst say: “Our suffering here is nought compared to the reward which awaiteth us in the heavens!” And thou didst thyself strive to suffer with them for the sake of thy Creator’s love. Wherefore, having received the gift of miracles from Christ God, thou helpest those who suffer amid divers trials, and dost rescue from cruel misfortunes those who glorify the Lord and honor thy sacred sufferings with love.

O invincible John, martyr of the Lord, bearing the name which signifieth grace, thou bestowest grace and mercy upon those who with faith call upon thee with prayer, and bringest joy to the divinely wise people who with faith call upon thee for aid amid their trials and honor thy memory with sacred joy. Wherefore, entreat Christ, that He save us from all misfortunes, in that He is almighty.

Glory…, in Tone IV —

Who doth not marvel, who doth not render glory, who doth not hymn the miracles of John, the glorious warrior of Christ, who is wise in the faith? For even after his repose, he bestoweth a great many healings upon all who with diligence have recourse unto him. For his precious and holy relics pour forth grace abundantly to fulfill profitable requests. Wherefore, we piously cry out to him: Unceasingly entreat the Lord, that He save our Orthodox hierarchs and all who with faith have recourse to thy holy temple and ask thy fervent intercession before God: for thee do we have as an earnest mediator and intercessor for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…” —

The cruel tyrant gave thy holy body over to be executed by multifarious tortures; yet thou, O John of godly mind, didst not deny Christ, nor didst thou sacrifice to idols, but didst valiantly endure all, trusting in the future reward of never-ending delight in the Lord.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

By thy virtuous life thou didst spurn the world, O wonder-worker John, and, showing great loving-kindness for Christians in the command of thine army, thou didst set them at liberty. And having thereafter suffered thyself for Christ God in the Orthodox Faith, thou didst receive the inheritance of eternal blessedness.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Thy relics, O glorious one, pour forth the gift of healings upon those who honor thee diligently, drowning the passions and curing ailments, O John; and they put hordes of wicked demons to flight, and water the hearts of the faithful, producing the divine fruits of the virtues and the understanding of piety.

Glory…, in Tone VIII —

Come, ye Christ-loving people, and with understanding let us contemplate the good fight and magnanimous courage attained in the right path; for John, who is newly crowned, the great intercessor and martyr, crieth thus to the iniquitous Julian, an emperor loathsome to God: “Thou canst not entice me with thy words of evil guile into the luxury of this vain world, nor shalt thou separate me from the love of my God, the Creator of all! For, lo! I place my trust in Him, and on Him do I set all my desire, that I may become an heir to His heavenly kingdom!” Wherefore, glorifying Christ the King, let us praise the martyr, and make earnest entreaty on this the day of his commemoration: O holy John, pray thou continually, that peace be granted to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Troparion, in Tone IV —

O wonder-worker John, thou hast been shown to be a right faithful servant and warrior of God, the all-good King; for, having manfully suffered for the Faith and finished thy course in blessedness, in the heavens thou beholdest the Lord and Creator of all most splendidly, and helpest men who suffer amid all manner of trials. And thou dost strengthen soldiers in battle, rescuing them from capture by the enemy, from wounds, sudden death and cruel misfortunes. Wherefore, entreat Christ the Master, O ever-memorable one, that He deal mercifully with us in every circumstance, that He lead us not into temptations, but save our souls, in that He loveth mankind.

Glory…: Another troparion, in Tone VIII —

Loving the blessedness of the Gospel, O divinely wise John, thou didst honor purity with virginity of heart; wherefore, spurning the vanity of this world, thou didst hasten to behold God, Who hath glorified thee with miracles in the healing of those who suffer divers ailments. Therefore, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us deliverance from all tribulations, that we may receive the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, and as God revealed the resurrection: Disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave birth to Thee and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

But if a vigil be celebrated, we chant the first troparion, twice, and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the martyr, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the theotokion in the tone of the martyr’s troparion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…” —

Having beheld the sufferings of the honored martyrs, and kissed their fetters, thou didst ascend the heights of witness, O all-wondrous one; and setting all thy desire on Christ, thou becamest a merciful helper for all, assisting the suffering and nurturing the hungry, until thou didst commit thy soul into the hands of the Lord, O much-suffering John. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the heavenly hosts and the passion-bearer John unceasingly entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of sins and correction of life unto all of us who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Pleasing the immortal King of the ages, thou didst not sacrifice to graven images, but didst spurn all the wicked counsels of the iniquitous emperor, O glorious one. Wherefore, thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice unto the Word Who was sacrificed; for which cause thou pourest forth streams of miracles upon those who suffer amid trials, O merciful intercessor who prayest to God, O great John, soldier of the King, Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

O cloud of the noetic Sun, golden lampstand of the divine Light, unblemished, pure, all-immaculate Mistress: With the splendor of dispassion enlighten, I pray thee, my soul, which hath been benighted by the blindness of the passions; cleanse my polluted heart with torrents of compunction, and wash away the impurity of my deeds with tears of penitence, that I may cry out to thee with love: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of sins, for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Polyeleos, and this magnification —

We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer John, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses —

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…” —

We cry out to thee, O John, as to a valiant athlete and mighty soldier of Christ, the King of all: Rejoice, adornment and splendor of martyrs! Rejoice, radiant star of the Church and rampart and haven for those who have recourse unto thee, O glorious great-martyr John the warrior! By thy supplications save those who hymn thee from all harm by the alien, and deliver them from cruel afflictions. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

We, thy sinful servants, falling down cry out to thee with compunction, as to the Queen surpassing the hosts of heaven, the Mother of Christ our God, the mighty helper of our race: O Mary Theotokos, Virgin and Mistress, guide us to the will of the Lord, the King of heaven, all the days of our lives, and preserve us from all trials and afflictions of body and soul, entrusting us not to the aid of men; and have mercy on us, O all-hymned one.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV —

The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, §51 \[Jn 15:9-16\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “As the Father hath loved Me, so have I loved you: continue ye in My love. If ye keep My commandments, ye shall abide in My love; even as I have kept My Father’s commandments, and abide in His love. These things have I spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. This is My commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are My friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of My Father I have made known unto you. Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in My name, He may give it you.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI —

Today, the universal festival of the passion-bearer calleth us together. Come, ye who love God, let us with splendor celebrate his memory, saying: Rejoice, O great-martyr John, invincible warrior of the King of heaven, for thou didst manfully spurn the mindless command of the iniquitous Emperor Julian the idolater! Rejoice, O blessed one, helper of the athletes of Christ, for thou didst make them steadfast in the Orthodox Faith during persecution by the iniquitous, and with love didst suffer with them! Wherefore, Christ hath enriched thee with gifts of miracles. Entreat, then, the all-good God, that He save our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the martyr, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the Martyr, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Thy splendid feast doth joyfully summon us to a spiritual banquet, O holy John; and thereat thou honorest with gifts all of us who have recourse to thee, fulfilling our requests which are profitable.

Having fought the good fight on earth, O most blessed John, protecting the martyrs of Christ from the evil tyrant, thou hast received heavenly life from Christ God; wherefore, grant us help amid misfortunes.

Having spurned the tyranny of the iniquitous emperor as a true soldier, O divinely wise one, and distributed thy wealth to the poor for Christ’s sake, thou didst receive the gift of miracles from God; and reproving wicked men, thou givest aid to the pious.

*Theotokion:* In the excess of His love for men, the incorporeal Word became incarnate of thee in godly manner, O all-pure Virgin. Him do thou entreat, O Mistress, that He grant us everlasting blessedness.

Canon II of the Martyr, in Tone I —

*Irmos:* I shall exalt Thee, O God my Savior, for Thou hast risen from the dead, trampling down death.

O Jesus our Savior, grant us the disposition to thank Thee for all things, and to praise John, Thy favored one.

O glorious athlete John, with divinely wise mind thou didst do battle for God, the Creator of all; wherefore, thou hast conquered all our enemies.

O all-praised warrior, who hast been counted worthy to behold the incarnate God, we beseech thee: By thine entreaties deliver us from all misfortunes.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mary, divinely joyous palace of the preëternal Word, in thy loving-kindness make our hearts ever glad in God, even in the midst of tribulations.

Ode III

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having acquired a sure faith with the martyrs, and become a soldier of Christ Jesus, O courageous one, thou wast enriched with the virtues. Wherefore, ever grant goodly enlightenment unto those who celebrate thine honored memory.

Thou showest thyself to be the invisible persecutor of those who work evil wickedly, O martyr of Christ, and dost expose thefts which are done in secret. For thou hast received from God the power to do for everyone all things which conduce to salvation.

Possessed of a heart like an immovable pillar, O most honored John, thou didst show love for the martyrs of Christ, undaunted by the cruelty of the emperor. Wherefore, help us, that we be rendered steadfast in the love of the Lord.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, Mother of Jesus the Lord, entreat Him with all the saints, that He deliver us from all misfortunes and sorrows, that all who do evil to thy servants may be put to shame; and vouchsafe that we may ever praise thee and thy Son.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Thou Who by Thy Word established the whole world, that it not be shaken, establish also our mind in the fear of Thee, O Master and Lord.

Falling down before Thee, our God and Creator, in every evil circumstance, we pray: Through the entreaties of Thy martyr establish us in Thy will and in love.

With steadfast mind thou didst rely on the uprightness of the knowledge of God, O divinely blessed John; wherefore, make our souls steadfast, that we may set our hope in the Lord in all things. For, having spurned the lust of thy flesh, the lust of thine eyes and the pride of life, O martyr, thou wast established in the love of Jesus. Help us also to attain this.

*Theotokion:* O most blessed Mistress who gavest birth unto Christ Who establisheth all things: Strengthen us ever, that we may remain in His providence.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…” —

Ever pleasing the King of heaven and Creator of the ages, thou didst spurn the malicious and vile counsels of the iniquitous tyrant Julian, O glorious one, refusing to offer sacrifice unto inanimate idols; and thus thou didst commit thy soul into the hands of the Lord God. Him do thou beseech, O holy John, that He grant remission of sins unto us who honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion —

All creation — the assembly of the angels and the human race — rejoiceth in thee, O thou who art full of grace, thou sanctified temple and noetic garden of paradise, boast of virgins, through whom God, Who was our God from before time began, was incarnate and became a babe; for He made thy womb a throne, and thine innermost parts more spacious than the heavens. In thee doth all creation rejoice, O thou who art full of grace. Glory to thee!

Ode IV

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst emulate Christ God, Who of His own will was crucified on the Tree, O most honored one, crucifying thyself with Him by all manner of abstinence, prayer, almsgiving and many benefactions.

Lo! even to thy death thou didst humble thyself, O martyr John; for thy holy relics were hidden at a place where strangers were buried. Wherefore, the Lord hath glorified thee throughout all the world.

Having command of the corruptible army of the Emperor Julian the apostate, thou wast dispatched to put Christian martyrs to death; yet, preserving them, O blessed one, thou didst keep them in the Faith, that they might chant: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Doubt of my salvation assaileth me, O all-pure one, because of the evils which beset me; wherefore, quickly deliver me from them, granting me a goodly knowledge, for to thee alone have I fled, O Mother of God.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I have considered Thy dispensation, O Almighty One, and with fear have I glorified Thee, O Savior.

Great is Thy dispensation in all the world, O Lord, to Whom we ardently commit ourselves, praying to Thee with the saints.

Having finished the good fight in suffering, O martyr, help us with goodly understanding to glorify the Lord in fear.

Casting aside all fear of tyrants, thou didst render brotherly assistance to the people of God in time of persecution, O John. Drive from us the fear of dangers.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast counted worthy to be the Queen and Mother of the almighty King. Vouchsafe that we may glorify His merciful dispensation toward us.

Ode V

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Experiencing the divine mysteries in understanding, O John, thou didst proclaim the nativity of God, saying in the presence of all: “I know none other God than the Creator of all!”

“Love the Lord Who loveth you!” thou didst say to the suffering martyrs, O passion-bearer; and, made steadfast in His love, thou wast enriched with miracles, healing many sicknesses.

For the sake of Christ’s glory thou didst consider the glory of this world to be as nought, O divinely wise warrior; wherefore, having completed thy contest and been vouchsafed divine glory, pray that we also may receive it.

*Theotokion:* Glorifying thy loving-kindness toward us, O Mistress, we entreat thee: Free us from all tribulations, O Mary, and help us to rise early unto God, that we may be counted worthy of everlasting blessedness.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Thou Who broughtedst the ends of the earth into light out of the darkness of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawn of Thy love for mankind, O Lord.

O Master Who lovest mankind, enlighten us on the day when Thine athlete is commemorated in prayer, that with reverence we may rise early unto Thee.

Thou wast enlightened with God-given miracles, O martyr John; wherefore, rescue those who glorify thee from evil men, from loss and pain.

Valiantly conquering all the soul-destroying enemies with the luminous dawn, draw us out of the darkness of grievous passions into the light of joy.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin who gavest birth to God in our flesh, extending thy mercy unto all, entreat Him, that we may be illumined with heavenly light.

Ode VI

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Strengthened by the power of God, O John, thou glory of the martyrs, thou didst pay no heed to the threats of the impious; and, gazing joyously now upon God, deliver us from evils.

With supplications, fasting and all manner of abstinence in chastity, O most honored one, thou didst please God. Looking down from on high, free us from tribulations.

Thou grantest the petitions of those who honor thee with faith, O blessed one, denouncing evil men, and praying to God for the penitent.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos who gavest birth for us to Christ the Physician, heal thou the sufferings of our souls and bodies, and put to shame the evil machinations of the enemy by thy loving-kindness.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* With Jonah we cry out to Thee, O Lord, praying with a voice of praise: Lead up our life from corruption!

We will not cease to beseech Thee, the most compassionate Lord, moving Thy faithful warrior to pray with us: Rescuing us from sin, make us to dwell in heavenly life.

Thou dost praise God in the highest, O holy John, having served Him faithfully here on earth; wherefore, that hast drawn nigh also unto us who praise thee, for our salvation.

Having endured sufferings for Christ’s sake, O most lauded one, thou hast received most joyful blessedness; wherefore, accept thou our entreaties, and lead us into joy.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, who hast saved the world from pernicious corruption, deliver us from every evil circumstance.

Kontakion, in Tone VI —

With hymns let us right worthily praise John the warrior, the pious soldier of Christ, who vanquished the enemy, spiritual and corporeal, with divine wisdom; for, working wonders, he bestoweth abundant healings upon suffering people, and entreateth the Lord God to save the Orthodox from all misfortunes.

*Ikos:* Who can recount thy struggles and sufferings for thy faith in the Lord Jesus? With what praises can we crown thee for thy courageous stand in the law of the Lord and true piety? For, armed with chastity and all manner of good works, thou didst trample underfoot all the wiles of the soul-destroying foe; and hating wealth, glory and harmful lust, thou didst love poverty and the affliction for Christ’s sake, helping the suffering amid their tribulations. Wherefore, having made thine abode in the tabernacles of heaven, thou hast been enriched with gifts of all-glorious miracles. Therefore, O blessed one, watch over those who have recourse unto thee, rendering them aid, and saving the Orthodox from all misfortunes.

Ode VII

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Defying the ungodly command of the iniquitous tyrant, O passion-bearer John, thou wast shown to be a pious warrior of the almighty King; and, bedewed with grace, thou didst chant with the people of God: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The sweet, great and joyful festival which the chaste John, the most valiant of martyrs, hath organized, hath now illumined the people of the Lord; for he poureth forth healings upon those who pray to the Lord with faith and cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

As thou hast boldness before the Master of all, O holy John, in that thou art His dear favorite, intercede before Him for us in the midst of our perils, and help us to find deliverance from sins, that with godly mind we may chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* An all-glorious mystery hath been accomplished in thee, O Mother of God; for without seed thou didst conceive thy Son Who hast abolished the burden of our sins. Wherefore, placing our hope in thee and looking to thy help, we cry out with fervor: Blessed art thou, O Virgin Mistress!

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* All Thy works are true and Thy paths straight, O God of our fathers!

O John, physician who exacteth no fee, by thy supplications heal the infirmities and sufferings of the souls and bodies of those who cry out to the Lord: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst undertake every virtuous work, and didst offer thyself to the Creator of all as a sacrifice, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having pleased the all-good God in purity with prayer and fasting, O martyr, grant that we may cry out in God-pleasing manner: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to Christ, the way and the truth, direct us to the life on high, to the God of our fathers.

Ode VIII

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Seeking the highest, thou didst hate falsehood on earth, O blessed of God. Wherefore, united spiritually in love with the martyrs of Christ, thou didst boldly preach Jesus, the God-man, of Whom thou criest out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Providing in abundance what was needed, O John of pious mind, thou wast a nurturer of the poor; and watching over us who now have recourse unto thee, fulfill our requests, that we may cry out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Beholding thy zeal and thy perfect faith, O John, God Who seeth all things glorified thee with everlasting glory. Him do thou expediently entreat, that He take pity upon us who chant with pious mind: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O Mary, Bride of God, we flee unto thee and, falling down before thee, pray: Look upon our sorrow and the affliction wrought upon us by our enemies, O Mistress, and render peaceful the life of us all, in that thou gavest birth to the Lord, Whom we bless forever.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Jesus of Nazareth, the King of glory and Vanquisher of death, do ye exalt supremely for all ages!

O King of heaven, Who gavest victory over the power of the enemy to thy holy martyr, grant that we also may glorify thee for all ages, delivered from want.

Joyfully, O blessed one, thou hast gazed upon the King and Lord in the highest. Pray thou, that we may exalt Him supremely for all ages with a pure heart.

O warrior who reignest with Christ, vanquish all barbarians and destroy the counsels wickedly devised against us, that we may exalt the Lord for all ages.

*Theotokion:* O almighty Queen, maternally entreat God the King, that we may exalt Him supremely in every place, and hymn thee for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon I of the Martyr

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Thou didst show thyself to be a good ally of the people of God, O all-glorious one, protecting the persecuted, and even now thou dost aid the faithful with miracles; wherefore, we magnify Christ God at the memorial of thy benefactions.

Thy wonders are proclaimed throughout all the world, O all-blessed John; wherefore, assembling today, we send up glory to Christ Who hath glorified thee.

Hearken today unto us who praise thee and ask thy help, O martyr of Christ, and cease not to guide us toward those things which are profitable, showing thyself to be a most fervent intercessor and mediator before our God.

Thou hast shown thyself to be an excellent physician of the hearts of man, helping all the pious with miracles, O John; wherefore, hymning thee, we magnify Christ.

*Theotokion:* We never cease to hymn thee, O Virgin, our helper, protection, speedy aid and intercessor unashamed. Preserve thy servants from all affliction, and ever free us from the machinations of the evil one.

Canon II of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The incorporeal servant stood before her who is full of grace, saying: The Lord is with thee, whom we magnify!

O Lord of hosts, be Thou with us, strengthening our civil authorities, our hierarchs and all Thy people, and saving them by the supplications of Thy saint, that we may piously magnify Thee and the Theotokos without ceasing.

Pray thou to God in Trinity, O holy John, that He count worthy ever to magnify Him as Creator of all those who believe on His name with godly understanding.

Interceding, O favorite of the Lord, free from grief those who celebrate thy memory, and give us joy to drink, that we may magnify the Lord and the Mother of God.

*Theotokion:* O Mary full of grace, regard all thy servants with mercy, that in joy we may magnify thee without ceasing.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples…” —

O holy crowned one, standing before the throne of Christ with the angels, and filled with light therefrom, mediate peace for the world by thy supplications, O athlete, and salvation for us who piously celebrate thy memory and have recourse to thee amid tribulations, O John who art most rich.

Glory…: Another exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…” —

By knowing thyself, thou didst come to know God, the all-creating Cause, in Whom thou didst believe; and, having confessed Him, thou dost illumine the world with miracles, O divinely blessed John.

Now & ever…: Theotokion —

Desiring to recall the perishing world out of corruption, O Theotokos, the Lord made His abode within thy womb, as thou didst know. Wherefore, having obtained salvation, we all cry out to thee: O most hymned Virgin who gavest birth to the Joy of the whole world, fill us with joy, ever preserving us from the evils committed by the enemy.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…” —

Beholding the sufferings of the right victorious martyrs, full of divine boldness thou didst not fear the tyrannical and ungodly emperor, but, approaching them with zeal, thou didst strengthen them for their contest. With them entreat the Lord, O athlete John, that our souls be saved.

Beholding the flesh and flowing blood of the many saints who were suffering at the hands of the iniquitous Emperor Julian for Christ our God, thou didst help them, O blessed one, in their chains and afflictions, consoling them with goodly discourse, that they not lose their goodly hope, but await their future reward and the joy of heavenly crowns.

By thy patience, O John most praised, thou didst obtain thy reward, committing thy soul into the hands of the Master of all; and thou hast been enriched by Him with gifts of miracles. Wherefore, beseech Christ God in behalf of those who honor with love thy holy memory.

A pious woman was counted worthy to behold thee. And, appearing to her, O martyr, thou didst command that thy precious relics be glorified. And, receiving them with joy, she set them forth in the church with sweet fragrances. O athlete, entreat Christ God, that He grant great mercy unto those who hymn thee.

Glory…, in Tone V —

Let us hasten with faith and with love give voice to festive hymns, and let us join chorus, rejoicing, on this festival of the all-praised John, the warrior of Christ. Let kings and princes come together, let choirs of hierarchs hymn the feast of the athlete with song, and let the armies of the angels be glad, looking on. For we know him to be our intercessor amid tribulations, the true joy of the despondent, the enricher of the poor, the comforter of all who find themselves in grief, who doth fervently anticipate the needs of all in every place. To him do we now say: O John, warrior of Christ, by thy supplications save those who with faith have recourse to thy sacred temple.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone —

Let us trumpet forth the clarion call of hymns; for the Virgin Mother and Queen, bowing down from on high, crowneth those who hymn her with blessings. Let kings and princes come together, and let them clap their hands in hymns to the Queen who gave birth to the King Whose good pleasure it was, in His love for mankind, to loose those who before were held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let us praise the all-pure Mother of the good Shepherd: the lampstand of golden luster, the Light-bearing cloud more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar containing Manna, the impassable gate of the Word, the refuge of all Christians; and let us praise her thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe unto us lowly ones the kingdom of heaven, for there is nought which is not possible for thy mediation.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the first canon of Ode III, and 4 from the second canon of Ode VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to the Romans, §116 \[Rom 15:1-7\]

Brethren: We who are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification. For even Christ pleased not Himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of those who reproached thee fell on me. For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus: that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV —

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Matthew, §69

\[Mt 16:24-28\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for My sake shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then He shall reward every man according to his works. Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in His kingdom.

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

