The 31st Day of the MONTH OF JULY

Forefeast of the Procession of the Precious & Life-creating Cross of the Lord

Commemoration of the Holy & Righteous Eudocimus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the Cross, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…” —

Celebrating the forefeast now, let all human nature leap up with joy; for the Tree of the Cross, the sure healing which giveth release from all infirmities and sufferings and every affliction, shall be set before all the faithful.

Come, O ye faithful, let us behold the strange wonder, how the Tree of the Cross quencheth the fever of every infirmity and extinguisheth the burning heat of the passions of those who celebrate its forefeast with faith and honor its festival.

O ye who are living, celebrate the forefeast with those who have died; for the Tree of life which slew hades, the protector of men, the resurrection of the dead, cometh now to impart true grace unto all and healings to mankind.

And 3 stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…” —

O blessed and divinely wise Eudocimus, thy pure soul, shining with Orthodox understanding and shedding the light of the radiance of the virtues, illumineth the fullness of the faithful, dispelling the darkness of the demons. Wherefore, O right wondrous one, we all honor thee with piety as one who hath a share in never-waning grace.

Possessed of a merciful soul, a pure mind, a vigilant heart, unwavering faith and truly unfeigned love, thou didst pass over from earth to the heavens and makest thine abode with the choirs of the righteous. Wherefore, we all honor thee with sacred hymns and piously call thee blessed, O blessed Eudocimus.

Strengthened by divine doctrines, thou didst drive carnal passions away from thy soul and didst become a pure habitation of the Holy Trinity. Wherefore, thou hast departed into divine delight since God now preserveth thy body incorrupt, O blessed one by divine judgments known to Him alone Who manifestly glorifieth thee, O Eudocimus.

Glory…, in Tone I —

How can we not marvel at thy prudence? How can we fail to praise thine angelic life, thy chastity of thought, thy meekness, humility and inner stillness, thy constant almsgiving, O venerable Eudocimus? For thou wast adorned with all the virtues, O blessed one. Wherefore, ineffable joy and the kingdom of heaven await thee.

Now & ever…, in the same tone —

The holy words of David truly reach their fulfillment today! For, lo! we publicly bow down before the footstool of Thine all-pure feet and, placing our hope in the shelter of Thy pinions, we cry aloud to Thee, O Most Compassionate One: Let the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us! Exalt the horn of Thine Orthodox people in the exaltation of Thy precious Cross, O most merciful Savior!

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos. Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone II: idiomelon —

Thou art my mighty protection, O tripartite Cross of Christ! Sanctify me with thy power, that I may bow down and glorify Thee with faith and love!

Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV —

He Who hath summoned thee from earth to the mansions of heaven also preserveth thy body incorrupt after death, O holy Eudocimus; for thou didst live in chastity and a pure life, without defiling thy flesh, O blessed one. Wherefore, entreat Christ God with boldness, that we may be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: troparion of the Cross, in Tone I —

O Lord, save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance, granting victory to Thine Orthodox people and preserving Thy community by Thy Cross.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the Cross, twice; Glory…, the troparion of the saint; Now & ever…, the troparion of the Cross, again.

One canon from the Octoechos; canon of the Cross, with 4 troparia; and canon of the saint, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Cross, in Tone I —

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

The divine Cross, which goeth before us, sheddeth the radiance of grace and illumineth all who bow down before it and piously hymn the crucified Christ.

Bowing down before the Cross doth elevate those who with love and faith glorify as God the Lord Who suffered in the flesh and hath restored us by His divine Passion.

The veneration of the Cross poureth forth the sweet fragrance of gifts: it ever perfumeth all who glorify Christ and dispelleth all the fœtor from men’s souls.

*Theotokion:* We who have recognized the Lord, Who was incarnate of thee and accepted the Cross and death, chant to Him as our Deliverer, O Bride of God, and call thee blessed.

Canon of the Saint, in Tone II —

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

As thy life is exalted and thou hast become wholly radiant through divine ascents, ask thou enlightenment for me who praise the honorable struggles whereby, having lived rightly, thou didst receive the things for which thou didst hope, O Eudocimus.

Loving the myrrh-scented doctrines, and devoting thyself to the reading of the sacred Scriptures, O most blessed one, thou didst put away foul-smelling and ignominious pleasures and, adorned with divine gifts, wast rendered fragrant.

Thou gavest no slumber to the eyes of thy soul, O blessed one, keeping vigilant watch and uniting thyself to God by standing in prayer for whole nights, unmoved by the needs of nature. Wherefore, thou hast attained unto the never-waning Day.

*Theotokion:* We ever bless thee, O Theotokos, as the animate bridal-chamber of God, the censer of the noetic and light-bearing Coal, crying: Rejoice, O mediatress of the Savior’s resurrection!

Ode III

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

The Cross which is now venerated, and which was prefigured in images, accomplishing wondrous things, worketh yet more marvelous wonders, sanctifying and enlightening those who glorify the Creator.

The Cross of Christ, the divine trophy of battles, is venerated, and it giveth mighty victories to the Orthodox, vanquishing hordes of the enemy.

The staff of the Lord, the Cross which is displayed in temples and homes, preserveth their foundations immovable and overcometh all the assaults and wiles of the adversaries.

The Cross of the Lord, which is piously venerated, filleth those who bow down before it with divine grace and noetic incense, and taketh away clouds of temptations and sorrows.

*Theotokion:* With the Tree of the Cross did He Who was born of thee draw mankind forth from the abyss of deception, O Theotokos, and lift up those who piously glorify thee to the understanding of Him.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Heeding the words flowing with life, thou didst drink of the waters of salvation which are inimical to bitter sin; and, chanting, thou didst say to God, O Eudocimus: There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!

Thou didst acquire mercy like unto that of Christ, didst distribute thy wealth among those in need, and hast obtained heavenly riches in return, crying out, O Eudocimus: There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!

Cleaving unto the Creator with divine love, thou didst receive a heavenly inheritance and, deified by communion with Him, thou dost partake of the Tree of life; and, chanting, O glorious one, thou didst say: There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* More honorable than the angels, thou didst bear the Creator of the angels in thy womb and gavest birth unto Him ineffably. To Him do we all chant: Thou art our God, and there is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone IV —

Inclined to good works, thou wast tried by temptations like gold in a crucible, O glorious Eudocimus. Wherefore, even after thy death thou dost richly pour forth miracles like water, and dost rid us of our infirmities, ever praying for us, that we may receive forgiveness of our offenses.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the Cross, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…” —

The sky is shown to be brighter than the sun, and by the light of the Cross it illumineth all things with its radiance. Wherefore, O Savior of all Who lovest mankind, illumine our mind and senses for its sake; for we have it as a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.

Ode IV

Canon of the Cross

Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Traced, the divine and precious Cross doth firmly expel the prince of darkness from the air and spreadeth beams of grace upon those who make its sign, and illumineth those who hymn Christ God.

Depicted in our hearts, the divine and all-precious Cross stilleth the sea of the passions, calmeth the threefold billows of tribulations, and bringeth all who make the sign thereof with love to the tranquility of righteousness.

Emitting grace like a burning ember, the precious Cross consumeth all the works of the enemy and dispelleth his power; and it easeth many in the Faith who praise and lovingly hymn Christ Who was crucified thereon.

Venerated with faith, the most precious and divine Cross poureth forth noetic streams of spiritual gifts and waters of healing; and it giveth drink without ceasing to those who bow down before it and honor it.

*Theotokion:* Enlightened by the sufferings of thy Son and acknowledging Him as the Benefactor of all, with love we glorify thee as our Queen and Mistress, O all-holy and pure one.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Preserving the teachings of the fathers unadulterated, with Orthodox understanding, from thine infancy thou didst have an undefiled life and a merciful demeanor, O right wondrous one.

Neither the tumult of the world, nor the possession of authority, nor transient glory spoiled thy desire for God, O Eudocimus; but in thy divine activities thou wast truly well pleased to desire Him.

Ever transported by divine teachings, O Eudocimus, thou didst lay low the enemy and didst receive the ability to work healings through the righteous judgment of Him Who directeth all things.

The shrine of thy relics, pouring forth the sweetness of thy rich healings, O Eudocimus, dispelleth the passions of those who honor thee with faith, and utterly consumeth all the hordes of the demons.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned one, thou didst give birth to God, Who truly became man and is hymned by the armies of heaven. Cease thou never to pray for thy servants, O Ever-virgin.

Ode V

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light upon us who rise early unto the judgments of Thy commandments, O Master Christ our God, Who lovest mankind.

Bowing down now with faith before the all-holy Cross, the mighty and immovable weapon which we wield, we receive invincible power over our enemies.

Holding and venerating now the precious Cross of Him Who made the unquarried rock pour forth water, we receive a wellspring of gifts.

The Cross of Christ, which appeareth to us shining with golden luster, through grace bestoweth gifts upon the souls of those who bow down before it and ever hymn the Lord God.

*Theotokion:* Holding fast to the staff of power, the Cross of thy Son, Christ our God, we hymn thee, the Queen of all, calling thee blessed.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Illumined by the pure radiance of the Holy Trinity, and protected by the law of God, thou didst pass through the night of this life without stumbling, given wings by thy divine visions, O blessed one; and thou hast made thine abode in divine life.

Now is a great wonder, fraught with awe, apparent within thee: how after thy burial thy body, lying in the grave, was truly preserved for many years undecayed for many years, through judgments which He alone knoweth Who glorifieth thee.

Blessed is the boldness which thou hast before God, and blessed the desire for Him which thou didst have within thy heart, living blessedly in accordance with thy name! Thou didst shine forth ­all-gloriously with divine effulgence, and hast illumined the assemblies of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother, ever entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee in behalf of us who piously call thee blessed, that we be delivered from tribulations, from soul-corrupting passions and griefs, and from the flame of everlasting torment.

Ode VI

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

Venerated now, the all-precious Cross proclaimeth the joy of the resurrection of Christ, and announceth the death of the author of evil.

Thou didst plant the precious Cross upon the earth, and it hath become a noetic stairway to the heavens for the faithful and an ascent for those who venerate and honor it.

The precious Cross which was planted in the midst of the earth now putteth forth as branches the gifts inherent in itself, and provideth shade for those who venerate it.

Venerated now, the Cross, which was prefigured by the staff which clove the Red Sea, cleaveth the sea of misfortunes and passions, and saveth those who bow down before it.

*Theotokion:* Having ascended the Cross, thy Son and God hath drawn up to the heavens us who truly honor His Mother with love.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thy sweat and joys have caused torrents of delight to gush forth, and the effulgence of healing, for the praise of Christ our God.

Springing forth like a vine laden with much fruit, thou didst flourish in the courts of God, bearing the grapes of the virtues in abundance for the Husbandman of our souls.

Gaining dominion over the passions, O Eudocimus, thou didst desire the kingdom of God and didst receive the joy of the righteous for thy higher volition.

*Theotokion:* Chosen as a beautiful and spacious habitation for God, O Virgin, thou becamest His bridal-chamber, lampstand and table.

Kontakion, in Tone II —

Desiring higher things, and uniting thyself with those on high, thou didst make thy soul a fiery chariot by the divine ascents of the virtues, O all-blessed Eudocimus; and living on the earth like one of the incorporeal ones, thou wast well pleasing to the Creator of all.

*Ikos:* By thy right faith, O blessed Eudocimus, thou didst show forth a twofold life, pleasing God in both. Wherefore, thou didst acquire the kingdom of God as thine inheritance and, living now with the saints, dost stand before the Master of all. But thou didst preserve thy body free from defilement and hast left it intact for those who honor thee with love; for, having lived a pure life, O glorious one, thou wast well pleasing to the Creator of all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The Cross which was soaked with the precious blood of Christ poureth forth rivers of the radiance of noetic gifts and giveth drink to all who bow down and hymn it with faith.

The Cross of Christ, which cast down death and the enemy and broke the noetic chains now openeth the portals of life and incorrupt food for those who with pure faith and love bow down before it.

Those who bow down before the Cross with love are protected by its power; they drive away enemies, spiritual and visible, and are preserved unharmed, chanting hymns to Christ.

*Theotokion:* The Cross of thy Son hath been given to us as might and power over the enemy through thine acceptable and maternal boldness, O Bride of God, whereby we crush the assaults of the foe.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Enlivened by the might of the Bestower of life, thou didst restrain the desires of the flesh, O thou who art most rich, and didst furnish thy mind with wings to fly to the heavens, chanting mightily: Blessed and all-glorious is God!

Thou didst abase thyself, acquiring a noble character with wholeness of mind; and, exercising thyself in the study of the divine Scriptures, thou didst make the all-seeing God the object of all thy desire, O blessed one.

O blessed Eudocimus, thou wast counted worthy of the kingdom on high, the heavenly city, the paradise of God, the delight of the righteous, incorruptible sustenance, riches which cannot be taken away, and never-waning light.

*Theotokion:* Him Whom thou didst bear do thou ever entreat, O Mistress, that He deliver me from slavery to the passions and from damnation, from the cruel despair which vexeth me, and from the oppression of those who afflict me, O pure and divinely joyous one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Beholding the Cross which, having been set up, felled death, the hordes of the noetic enemy hide themselves under the earth; and those who venerate it are restored.

The all-radiant Cross, which was prefigured of old, hath Christ shown forth in the heights of heaven. And piously venerating it now, the faithful are exalted and made luminous with splendor.

The Cross, which the prophets truly proclaimed of old, is revealed as the footstool of Christ; and bowing down before it now with true faith, we delight in its rich gifts.

*Theotokion:* Thy Son and Lord, O Virgin, Who hath poured forth dispassion on mortals by His suffering, through thee doth ever renew us who hymn thee with love, in that He is our Benefactor.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou didst once prefigure Thy Mother in the furnace of the children, O Lord; for her image drew from the fire those who entered it, without being consumed. We hymn and exalt her supremely for all ages, who through Thee hath been made manifest today to the ends of the earth.

Pondering the dread fire which will issue forth before the throne of Christ, with compunction of heart thou dost shed tear-drops of fervor which quench the furnace of the passions for thee, O divinely wise Eudocimus.

Thou didst fix the eye of thy soul wholly upon God, O wise one, and didst cleave unto Him, crying out in psalmody: O my Christ, deliver me from the mire of deadly passions forever!

Thou didst wait in patience, and wast lowly of heart and merciful to those in need, being of goodly demeanor and a virtuous character, O most honored one; and having lived therein, thou dost pour forth the grace of miracles.

Possessed of a divine understanding, thou wast shown to be a fulfiller of the words of the Master, loving the right-hand paths, but manifestly avoiding those of the left, in that thou art prudent and wise. Wherefore, we honor thee, O divinely wise one, forever.

*Theotokion:* The Creator of Adam taketh form through thy pure blood, and He Who feedeth every creature is nourished with thy milk, O Virgin Theotokos. Wherefore, we glorify thee as the Mother of God.

Ode IX

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

The precious Cross poureth forth true drops of immortality and incorruption upon those who venerate it. It giveth life, cleanseth, reneweth, and maketh those who hymn Jesus Who was nailed to it worthy of higher glory and grace.

Emitting the works of God like all-radiant beams, the most precious Cross guideth to the unapproachable and immaterial Light those who venerate it with love and pure faith, illumining those who hymn the Creator of all.

O all-good Word Who hast sanctified the tree of Thine all-holy Cross with Thy precious blood, by its activity illumine us and hallow those who bow down before it and hymn the Master of all.

*Theotokion:* Grace which hath shone forth upon all more brightly than the sun, O Virgin, driveth away the clouds of misfortunes and the passions, and with the light of the knowledge of God it illumineth those who lovingly glorify thee and unceasingly hymn thy Son as the Master of all.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Desiring to see the glory of our God, thou didst adorn thyself with the virtues of divine knowledge; and, dwelling with the angels, thou hast entered into the splendid bridal chamber as a lamp-bearer, and dost manifestly delight in the vision of God.

Like the dawn, like the sun hath the day of thy commemoration shone forth, illumining the hearts of those in darkness; for thou hast truly been shown to be a child of the light and the day, O divinely wise Eudocimus. Wherefore, we honor thee.

Adorned with wisdom, illumined with understanding, arrayed in lowliness of heart, resplendent in the high stature of thy life, thou didst pass over to the noetic courts. Therefore be thou ever mindful of those who honor thee, O Eudocimus.

We celebrate today the honored festival of thy departure from the earth, which bringeth us spiritual benefit; for, as one who pleased God and acted upon His commandments, thou wast shown to be unashamed, O right wondrous Eudocimus.

*Theotokion:* Thy womb became the receptacle of the Light which enlighteneth the world, O divinely joyous one. Wherefore, wretch though I am, I beseech thee: By the supplications of the divinely wise Eudocimus, grant me beams of light, O Bride of God.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; Glory…, that of the saint —

Shining forth like the sun, thou dost emit rays of miracles, illumining the hearts of all, O thrice-blessed Eudocimus, and thou dost save those who with faith keep thy glorious memory.

Now & ever…, that of the Cross: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…” —

The forefeast of the Cross is celebrated and the world is made new; the ranks of the angels hymn the One Who was crucified for our sake, and they keep festival and rejoice with us, crying out like David: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, O Master!

At the Aposticha, Glory…, in Tone I —

How can we not marvel at thy prudence; how can we fail to praise thine angelic life, O venerable Eudocimus, which thou didst live with chastity of thought, meekness, humility, inner serenity and constant almsgiving? For thou wast adorned with all the virtues, O blessed one. Wherefore, unutterable joy awaiteth thee: the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…, of the Cross, in Tone VI —

The voices of the prophets foretold the holy Tree whereby Adam was vouchsafed freedom from the ancient curse; and creation today lifteth up its voice as the Cross is elevated, asking great mercy from God. O Master, Who alone art infinite in thy compassion, be thou our cleansing, and save our souls.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VII —

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto us?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213

\[Gal 5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI —

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43

\[Mt 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

Communion Verse —

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

