The 2nd Day Of The Month Of September

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Mamas

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father John The Faster, Patriarch Of Constantinople

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

Shedding thy blood, O blessed one, thou didst present thyself to Christ, the Bestower of life, Who shed His blood for thy sake, and Who hath made thee to participate in His glory and to share in His kingdom, in that thou didst prevail over the deceiver and didst utterly reduce his cruel snares to ashes.

Thou wast a pillar of piety set firmly upon the rock of faith, unshaken by temptations or misfortunes, O blessed one, for the great tempest and tumult and the waves which buffeted thee did not cast down thine unbreakable strength; for thou didst desire to be adorned with the crown of martyrdom.

Following the life-bearing steps of our incarnate God Who, by His suffering on the Cross, cast down the tyrant, O athlete, rejoicing, thou didst enter the arena of martyrdom, and, lacerated with wounds, with thy flesh, O martyr, thou didst wound him who boasted that he would destroy the sea, and thou didst cast him down to the ground.

And 3 stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same melody—

O most honored father John, withdrawing from the tumultuous confusion of the world, thou didst hasten to the serenity of Christ, O most venerable one; and thou wast manifestly enriched in truth with the most rich effulgence of vision and divine activity, and, made splendid by thy godly life, didst impart them to the faithful.

O most honored father John, honorably adorned with vestments like another Aaron, thou now beholdest the Holy of holies beyond the second veil. O the ineffable brilliance of thy mind, which passeth understanding, O divine adornment of hierarchs, whom thou hast now joined in fellowship!

O most wise father John, becoming godly in the simplicity of thy character, thou standest now before God, united with Him through a higher unity, deified at His continual behest, filled with His light, O divine and most sacred adornment of hierarchs.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II—

At the table of God thou wast set like a newly planted olive-tree, the child of those who walk the path of the Lord. For the sake of thy martyrdom the Lord hath blessed thee, and thou lookest upon the good things of the heavenly Sion, ever delighting with thy parents in divine joy. O right laudable Mamas, by thine entreaties make us partakers thereof.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb as a man led forth, of His own will, to the slaughter, she said, lamenting: “Dost Thou now hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? Wherefore hast Thou done this thing, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine utter goodness which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone IV—

Come together, O ye faithful, and let us celebrate the memory of the martyr Mamas, for he hath been shown to be a new Abel; for as Abel, being a shepherd of sheep, brought a lamb as a sacrifice and was the first to receive the crown of martyrdom, so did the glorious athlete, who presided over grazing flocks, bring himself to Christ as a right acceptable sacrifice through martyrdom. And as he hath boldness before the Lord, he asketh peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Beholding Christ crucified, Who loveth mankind, His side pierced by the spear, the all-pure one wept, crying aloud: “What is this, O my Son? How have the thankless people rewarded Thee for the good things Thou didst do for them? And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Mamas received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at nought the tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Glory…: Troparion of the hierarch, in the same tone—

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility and riches through poverty. O father John, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the martyr, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Traversing the heavens as an excellent martyr, filled with thrice-radiant effulgence, O glorious one, vouchsafe divine illumination unto those who on earth honor the precious and splendid day of thy repose.

The Word, foreknowing the nobility and perfection of thy mind in all things, filled thee with understanding from thine earliest infancy and adorned thee in manifold ways with the sweetness of good works, O most lauded martyr and athlete Mamas.

Thy parents, braving danger for the inviolate Faith in time of persecution by falsehood, were cast into prison; and there, at the command of God, they brought thee forth, who hast broken the bonds of polytheism.

*Theotokion:* In generations of generations all-glorious things are said of thee who, having contained God the Word within thy womb, remainest pure, O Mary Theotokos. Wherefore, we all honor thee, our intercessor before God.

Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Germanus, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto Christ, Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea, and led Israel over to dry land, for He hath been glorified forever.

Let us chant unto Christ, Who shone forth in the world the wise hierarch who is resplendent with the precepts of the kingdom, for He hath been glorified forever.

O ye faithful, let us honor the great hierarch John, Who shone forth in the world with the light of piety and hath dispelled the gloom of impiety.

As thou standest with the angels before the unapproachable King, O most blessed John, thou preacher of sacred things, pray that purification be granted to those who celebrate thy memory.

*Theotokion:* In that thou didst conceive the preëternal and unoriginate Word of the Father and gavest birth to Him in the flesh in manner past recounting, O most hymned one, pray thou earnestly, that we be delivered from misfortunes.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, ­confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Upon the pinnacle of His Church hath Christ placed the athlete Mamas like a radiant star, illumining the whole world with the splendors of his sufferings and all-glorious miracles.

Ascending the mountain of true knowledge, and illumined with purity of mind through visions, O blessed one, by the commands of God thou didst elevate the nature of dumb beasts to rational hymnody.

Thou wast a youth comely in beauty. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be unapproachable to those who sought iniquitously to seize thee, and thou didst bring thyself to the Lord of all, Who Himself had gone to suffering.

*Theotokion:* He Who stretched out the sky and sustaineth its whole vault by His divine nature was held in the flesh in thine embrace, O all-pure one, and hath shown thee to be the confirmation of all the faithful.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord Who in the beginning established the heavens and founded the earth upon many waters, make me steadfast for the chanting of Thy glorification.

By abstinence and steadfast prayer, O God-bearing father, thou didst ascend to the lofty city of the virtues, where thou partakest of a torrent of sweetness.

As thou hast boldness before God, O venerable and wise hierarch John, pray that those who celebrate thy memory with faith may be saved.

As a teacher of the dogmas of piety and a true utterer of wise words, thou hast been crowned for thy victory over heresies, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, we all hymn thee as the heaven and throne of God, in that Jesus Christ, the Truth, revealed Himself through thee.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

As the precious offspring of piety, by the power of the Spirit thou wast shown to be the destroyer of impiety, O Mamas; for thou didst denounce the falsehood of idolatry in the arena and didst right boldly proclaim that the Trinity is to be hymned. Wherefore, cast to the wild beasts, O athlete, thou didst slay the beast, the serpent who is the author of evil. For this cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

A divine vessel of abstinence and a fount of piety which cannot be taken away wast thou shown to be, O blessed and venerable father John, illumining thy life with dispassion and enriching those in need with alms. Entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, who dost surpass the angels in purity. With the waters of thy supplications cleanse me who, more than all other men, am dust and have been defiled by carnal transgressions, granting me great mercy, O pure one.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out maternally, lamenting: “Alas, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

With wisdom and unafraid thou didst of thine own will commit thyself to struggles; for thou didst have Christ helping thee with divine power, making thy weakness strong and showing thee forth as a witness to His sufferings, a partaker of splendor on high.

The most rational wild beast, given thee by God as a companion, became tame; for with divine love thou didst subdue the irrational passions and wast shown to be adorned with a most wise intelligence, vanquishing the irrationality of the enemy.

Before the tyrants’ tribunal thou didst stand, O blessed one, most manifestly proclaiming the incarnation of the Word, casting down the savagery of ungodliness and teaching all to chant with confidence: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* By the supernatural offspring of thy birthgiving, O most immaculate Theotokos, the pangs of sin were loosed, the nature of mortals was released from the curse, the heavens were opened for thy sake to those below, and men join chorus with the angels.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Mystically foreseeing Thee incarnate of the Virgin, O Word, the prophet cried out in song: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

In hymns let us all praise the wise hierarch, saying: O God-bearing John, pray thou earnestly to the Lord, that we be saved.

Having thee as a planter of the dogmas of piety and a wise hierarch, O divinely blessed John, we praise thee with hymns and songs.

O glorious primate and sustainer, hierarch of the Lord, with songs and hymns we, the faithful, celebrate thy sacred memory.

*Theotokion:* O unwedded Bride, pure and undefiled Mother of Christ God, entreat Him without ceasing, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Lacerated, the glorious Mamas in nowise paid heed to his body, setting aside the grossness of corruption to be torn asunder and the garments of his skin to be rent apart, receiving instead the vesture of incorruption.

Grateful praises didst thou chant to thy Creator when thy side was pierced with a spear, O most blessed one, and thou didst hear a voice from heaven, strengthening thy mind for that which is more exalted and easing the pain of thy sufferings.

As thou didst lay in prison a most beautiful dove appeared to thee in an all-glorious vision, O most blessed and much-suffering athlete, bearing thee the food of incorruption; for thou didst pass beyond the bounds of corruption.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the mediatress of the divine incarnation and of ineffable deliverance, having given birth to Him Who was begotten of the Father before the sun shone forth; for through thee hath the nature of those on earth been joined to God and set upon the throne of glory.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

As a pastor thou wast anointed with the oil of piety, O divinely wise one; wherefore, we all praise thee as a hierarch, O venerable one.

As an emulator of the apostles in pangs and vigils, O divinely wise and glorious one, thou didst intercede for the people of the Church.

Thou didst emulate the zeal of Elijah and Moses the God-seer, O father manifest in sanctity, and didst put to shame the teachers of heresy.

*Theotokion:* Come ye, and with the angel let us all honor as Queen the blessed one who gave birth to the King of all.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Burning with zeal for God, O most sacred and valiant athlete, bedewed by divine rain from heaven thou didst in nowise take heed of the burning flame.

He Who in manifest light transformed the furnace into dew for the three youths rescued thee, O most blessed and divinely wise one, from the flame, and all-gloriously showed thee to be mightier than the fire.

Undergoing tremendous struggles, thou didst show thyself to be most supreme, wondrous among athletes, a martyr tried and tested. Wherefore, the Judge of the contest vouchsafed thee greater rewards.

*Theotokion:* Through thy divine birthgiving, O all-pure one, we have come to share in the divine nature; and, praising thee with ranks of the angels, we have inherited heavenly rest in Christ.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the uttermost abyss, O Christ God, in that Thou lovest mankind deliver me from my sins, and direct my life, I beseech Thee.

With thy divine dogmas and wise instructions thou didst adorn the glory of the Church, O blessed John, and didst cause heresies to vanish.

With the beauty of thy dogmas thou didst illumine all creation like a lamp of piety, O divinely wise teacher, and with the word of God thou hast cast heresies into darkness.

Arming thyself with thy tongue and discourse instead of a sword, O venerable one, thou didst cut down all false doctrines and didst clearly explain the Trinity to all.

*Theotokion:* O Christ God Who wast born of the Virgin and enlightenest the world, deliver me from my transgressions, in that Thou lovest mankind, and direct my life, I pray Thee.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

With the staff given thee by God, O holy one, thou didst shepherd thy people in life-bearing pastures; and thou didst crush the invisible and untamed wild beasts beneath the feet of those who hymn thee. For all who find themselves amid misfortunes have thee as their fervent intercessor, O Mamas.

*Ikos:* Throughout all the world we hymn thee as an all-glorious martyr who joinest chorus with the angels in the heavens, O Mamas, who before wast manifestly suckled by a deer in the wilderness, and now, as a good shepherd, dost tend the rich people of the Lord with a staff of power, guiding them to a place of verdure, where the sweetness of paradise is truly to be found. For this cause thou didst forsake the world, that all may have thee as a fervent intercessor, O Mamas.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The aspect of the furnace was full of the coolness which thou didst need; for, shut up within it for many days, O Mamas, thou wast not consumed, but didst cry out to the Creator: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

In the midst of the flame, O martyr, thou didst have angels as companions, joining chorus with thee and sharing in ineffable hymnody; and with them thou didst cry out to the Master of all: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Issuing forth from the furnace, thou wast truly like a never-fading rose, like a most comely bridegroom departing from a bridal-chamber, consuming the mindless, but illumining those who beheld thee, chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Lo! the prophecy of the divinely eloquent one hath now been fulfilled! For thou didst contain God the Word in thy womb, O Virgin, and gavest birth to the Bestower of life. To Him do we all cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord God of our fathers, Who in the beginning founded the earth and established the heavens by Thy word: blessed art Thou forever!

Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers, Who hast shown forth the pious and wise hierarch as a beacon on the earth.

Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers, Who hast shown the great John to be a true shepherd for Thy flock.

Having put down the uprisings of the flesh, O father, thou didst cry out to Christ: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers, Who wast born of the Virgin for our sake and hast delivered the world from the enemy.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like Daniel thou didst shut the mouths of the wild beasts with a divine invocation of the Master, O glorious one; thou didst slay a serpent, didst put the ungodly to shame, and livest in gladness as a victor, chanting in the heavens: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Stony of heart, the all-iniquitous ones who worshipped stones cast stones at thee, O blessed martyr, as thou didst lift the sacred eyes of thy soul to the unhewn and unshakable Stone; and thou didst fervently chant: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The Judge of the contest, extending the crown of victory from on high to thee as victor when thou hadst passed through thy good contest, O thou who art most rich, called thee to hasten to Him, running the honorable and sweet course, and chanting fervently: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Supernaturally thou didst conceive Him Who was begotten of the Father without mother, yet thou didst remain virgin even after giving birth, O pure one; for in thee doth the divine Union renew nature and restore the boundaries of existence. Wherefore, in Orthodox manner, we hymn thee forever as the Theotokos who truly gave birth unto God.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Emulating Moses, O thrice blessed hierarch, thou didst ascend the mountain to the darkness, receiving the noetic law of grace; wherefore, we hymn Christ forever.

Shepherding thy people, O hierarch, thou didst drive away the falsehood of Egypt, and, avoiding the passions of Babylon, thou didst attain the heavenly Sion as thy dwelling-place for all ages.

Anointed with myrrh, discourse and works of piety, O most sacred one manifest in sanctity, thou didst perform the sacred and divine services; wherefore, thou hymnest the Trinity in one Essence for all ages.

*Theotokion:* The Lord Who dwelt in the Virgin’s womb and, for her sake, hath restored the old Adam in awesome and indescribable manner, hymn ye and exalt supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou didst lay down thy life for thy Deliverer and didst ardently hasten to Him, splendidly adorned with the beauties of thy sacred struggles and wondrous contests, O most lauded warrior, thou beacon of the whole world and ornament of the Church.

Thou hast joined the angels, having acquired an angelic life on earth, and with them thou dost in praise joyously chant sacred hymnody to the Trinity with great laudation, O Mamas, deified by divine communion and enriched with glory unsurpassed.

As thou hast boldness before God, O most blessed martyr, be thou mindful of those who joyously celebrate this thy divine festival and praise thine honorable and sacred suffering with pure faith; and save us from tempest, misfortune and trials.

*Theotokion:* Who hath ever heard that among those on earth there was a mother who knew not man yet gave birth to a child, and that the Child to which she gave birth supernaturally was the unoriginate God Who is consubstantial with the all-unoriginate Father? O awesome mystery! O the divine fellowship whereby we have been united to God!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving, O Ever-virgin, which was revealed to the law-giver on the mountain in the fire and the bush, for the salvation of us, the faithful, do we magnify with unceasing hymnody.

Having shown us the words of everlasting life by dispassion and faith, hope and love, O wise John, pray thou, that our souls be saved.

We all praise thee as a hierarch who shepherded the people of the honored Church with the staff of the Holy Spirit and drove away heresies hateful to God.

O father John of great renown, in psalms and hymns we honor thee continually as a hierarch and beacon of the Church, and we venerate the shrine of thy relics.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O ever-living wellspring of incorruption! Rejoice, O most radiant cloud of the noetic Sun! Rejoice, O chariot of the full Godhead! Rejoice, thou ark of sanctification!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples…”—

Living in the mountains, thou wast nourished with the milk of a doe, O martyr Mamas; and thou didst appear in the stadium, contending most diligently; and, having received the crown of victory, thou didst depart unto the Lord.

Theotokion—

The most false and wicked enemy, who of old envied me the divine and blessed life in paradise, caused me to be driven from Eden; but he is slain by thy birthgiving, O Virgin.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to the Romans, § 99 \[Rom. 8:28-39\]

Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be planted.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall ­blossom forth.

Gospel according to John, § 50 \[Jn. 15: 1-7\]

The Lord said to His disciples: I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

