The 3rd Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Anthimus,

Bishop of Nicomedia

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father Theoctistus, Fellow Faster of Euthymius the Great

\(for this day we provide also the service for St. Edward of England\)

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” six stichera, three for St. Anthimus, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “O most lauded martyrs...”—

O divinely wise and blessed one, with the dye of thy blood thou hast brightened thy sacred and divine vesture. For piously thou hast gone from strength to strength and from glory to glory. And now do thou pray that peace and great mercy be granted our souls.

Thou didst offer to God the unbloody sacrifice, as a most lawful priest; and later, as a martyr most true, thou didst offer thyself unto Christ with blood, as an acceptable sacrifice and a whole burnt offering, O divinely eloquent and most honored one. Him do thou entreat in behalf of those who hymn thee.

Legions of martyrs didst thou lead unto Christ, O father Anthimus, teaching and instructing by thy doctrines and instructions, and manifestly presenting thyself as an example, O divinely wise one. With them do thou pray, that peace and great mercy be given to our souls.

And three stichera for St. Theoctistus, in the same tone and melody—

O father Theoctistus, thy splendid memorial doth gladden the assemblies of monks with the beauties of thy life, the riches of thy wonders, and the splendors of thy gifts. Entreat thou Christ, that peace and great mercy be granted our souls.

O father Theoctistus, the demons stood in awe of thy patient abstinence, and they were set at naught by thine unceasing supplications, O most lauded one; for thou didst acquire Christ as a companion. Him do thou now beseech, that peace and great mercy be granted our souls.

O father Theoctistus, thou wast a dwelling place of God; for, having preserved that which is in His image, proclaiming the truth by thy life, thou didst show forth the calling of thy holy model, O most wondrous one. Entreat thou Christ, that peace and great mercy be granted our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI: Idiomelon—

Thou wast a most lawful priest even to thine end, O blessed Anthimus; for, celebrating the divine and ineffable mysteries as a priest, thou didst shed thy blood for Christ God, and didst bring thyself to Him as a right acceptable sacrifice. Wherefore, as thou dost possess boldness before Him, earnestly pray for those who with faith and love keep thine all-honored memory, that they who honor it may be delivered from all temptations, misfortunes and evil ­circumstances.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

The Virgin, standing once with the virginal disciple before the Tree at the time of the crucifixion, weeping, cried out: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, O Christ, Who art the dispassion of all?”

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory..., in Tone VI—

O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast received the reward of thy labors in the heavens. Thou hast routed legions of demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave birth to Thee cried out: “What is this strange mystery that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest on the Tree, suspended in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Anthimus. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory..., and the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, and becamest a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. O Theoctistus, our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee, the flower of pastors and martyrs,” in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

Receiving a wreath of piety plaited of the dual strands of hierarchy and martyrdom, thou art blessed by Christ, O all-glorious one.

Thy sacred minister is brought to Thee, the Chief Shepherd, like an innocent and pure lamb, on the arms of the iniquitous.

Thou didst demolish the bastions of the heretics with the boldness of piety, O hierarch, preaching the uncreated Trinity.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Theotokos, who in manner past nature gavest birth unto the eternal and all-divine Word incarnate: we hymn thee.

Canon of the Venerable One, the acrostic whereof is: “I recount thy struggles, O Theoctistus,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassible, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Smitten with the desire for dispassion, O wise father Theoctistus, thou didst quell the uprisings of the flesh, aided by God. And now, entreat the Lord, that we be filled with noetic light who chant: For gloriously hath He been glorified!

The great Euthymius, having cleaved to thee with divine love, O father Theoctistus, abiding with thee mightily, trod the path of abstinence with true activity; and with thee he cried out: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Thou didst subjugate thy body, O all-blessed Theoctistus, enslaving the carnal passions, for thou didst receive the effulgence of grace; and, illumined therewith, didst cry out in godly manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

*Theotokion:* Having thee as their hope of salvation, O Virgin Mother of God, who gavest birth unto the Word, the all-wise ones, the beloved Euthymius and the divine Theoctistus, shone forth upon all with divine knowledge in abstinence, crying out to the Lord: For gloriously hath He been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of those who are in darkness, and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Having first served the Deliverer in thy sacred ministry, thou wast shown to be a hieromartyr; and after, thou didst make of thyself a priestly sacrifice.

Thou wast not a hireling, but a shepherd most true, O venerable one, shedding thy blood for thy flock, O beloved of God.

Thou didst tend the flock of the Master with care, O hierarch; wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in a place of verdure.

*Theotokion:* By thine entreaties grant us aid, O all-pure one, repelling the assaults of grievous circumstances.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of those who are in darkness, and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou didst mortify thy flesh with abstinence, O venerable one, and didst enlighten thy soul with gifts of divine grace.

Thou didst direct all thy desire toward thy Master, and didst arm thyself against the demons, O God-bearer.

*Theotokion:* Chanting hymns, the fasters, divinely instructed, glorified thee as the Theotokos who gaveth birth to God, O Mistress.

Sessional hymn of St. Anthimus, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “The angelic choir...”—

O wise one, thy blood, like that of Abel, cried out to God mystically from the ground, O divinely wise one; for thou didst clearly preach the uncreated Trinity. Wherefore, O Anthimus, shining forth as a shepherd, thou didst drive off the wild beasts of the heresies, in that thou art a protector of the Faith.

Glory..., and that of the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...”—

Chief among the fathers wast thou called, and thou wast an all-radiant beacon to the world, O venerable father Theoctistus. Wherefore, we honor thy memory unceasingly.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Stretching forth thine all-pure hands, O Virgin Mother, protect those who set their hope on thee and cry out to thy Son: Grant Thou Thy mercies unto all, O Christ!

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding thy Son uplifted on the Tree, O all-pure one, thy maternal womb rent apart, and thou didst cry out in grief: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou hast waned, O my timeless Light?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Lord; I have considered Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Transforming packs of wolves into lambs by thy discourse, O blessed one, thou wast slain in thy body, and didst commit thy spirit to the Lord.

Thy sacrifice was pleasing unto the King of all as a savor sweet and most precious: thee who dost offer it in divine wisdom and who art brought as an offering on the arms of the iniquitous.

Thou wast first anointed with the oil of the priesthood, O venerable one, and later thou wast perfected by the blood of thy suffering, O father.

*Theotokion:* As Thou art without sin, O God, grant us cleansing of the sins we have committed in ignorance, and bring peace to Thy world, through the prayers of her who gave birth unto Thee.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou didst mount Thy steeds, Thine apostles, O Lord, and didst take their bridles in Thy hands; and Thy chariot becameth salvation unto those who sing with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a lover of the primal Wisdom, O all-wise one; for, wholly purified in soul and mind, thou didst live a blameless life, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having rid thy mind of the tumult of the passions, O glorious one, and wisely set thy senses aright, thou didst hasten to undisturbed serenity, O father, diligently crying out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Shaking off earthly grief through abstinence, the divine Theoctistus, Thy favored one, O Master, acquired heavenly hope, crying out with Euthymius: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* As thou didst appear in the world as a man from the Virgin, Thou hast granted victory to Thy venerable ones; for by Thy Cross they drove away the demons, crying out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Thou didst offer the unbloody sacrifice unto the Lord, and through thy blood didst bring thyself to Him as fruit, O Anthimus.

The divine Spirit enlightened thee, O hierarch; wherefore, we celebrate thine all-glorious memory.

Thy divine tongue dripped salvation, and the stream of thy blood dripped spiritual joy.

*Theotokion:* Still thou the constant tempest of my passions, O thou who gavest birth to the Helmsman and Lord.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Illumine us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thy lofty arm grant us Thy peace, O Lover of mankind.

Mortify our presumption and the uprisings of our flesh, O Thou Who lovest mankind, through the right acceptable supplications of Thy venerable one.

Thou lookest down upon us from on high, O most blessed one, and settest aright the life of us who keep thy memory with love, O wise one.

*Theotokion:* The two most excellent and divinely called ones who lived together preached God Who was incarnate of the pure Virgin and hath shone forth ineffably upon us.

Ode VI

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Thou didst baptize thy people with water and the Holy Ghost, as thou thyself wast baptized; and thou wast again baptized in thy blood, O father.

Choice and precious as a branch of the vine of life, thou hast produced a multitude of fruit for thy Master, O most blessed one.

Cease not to make entreaties to Christ for thy flock, O blessed one, setting forth thy blood as supplication.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, declare thee to be the temple and tabernacle of God, the animate chamber and the portal of heaven.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief, for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst shine forth upon those who are on earth like the sun, illumining them with the light of purity, emitting the radiance of the virtues, and teaching the splendors of chastity. And now, O Theoctistus, bring peace to the whole world by thy prayers.

Having been blessed with divinely wise thought, thou didst vanquish all things on earth, and didst prefer a heavenly inheritance, O all-blessed Theoctistus; and now thou manifestly livest in the heavens, rejoicing.

*Theotokion:* O right gracious and godly ones, ye were attracted by the beauty of the love of Christ, Who appeared in the world in the flesh of the holy and pure Mother of God; and ye were shown to be models of the renowned life of monks.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

Having lived piously among priests and finished the path of martyrdom, thou didst extinguish the immolations of the idolaters, being a champion for thy flock, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, it now honoreth thee, mystically crying out: By thy supplications deliver us from misfortunes, O ever-memorable Anthimus.

*Ikos:* Bestowing divine knowledge upon me, by thy supplications dispel the gloom of ignorance from my heart, that I may faithfully hymn thy holy memory, whereon the angelic choirs are divinely gladdened today, and men fittingly crown thy head with hymns of praise as with flowers, asking to receive from thee remission of their offenses, release from the evils of life, and to be delivered from enemies, visible and invisible, by thy prayers, O Anthimus, our father.

Ode VII

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with faith in the Trinity, singing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thy sacrifice was shown to be good and rich, O all-blessed Anthimus; for, offering up the unbloody sacrifice, thou didst offer thyself to the Master Himself with blood, crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having shepherded and been shepherded, thou didst derive wealth from both, O father; and safeguarding this, thou didst preserve it with the seal of martyrdom, chanting unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst theologize concerning the nature of the Hypostases in the Church of the faithful, and, slain by the judgment of the unjust before it, O God-bearer, thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* For our salvation thou didst reveal Thyself incarnate of the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore, knowing Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, we cry out in thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod upon the flame and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Having cleaved to thy Master with all thy desire and with steadfast abstinence, thou art now sustained by His splendors, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst offer thy life to the Master as a divine fruit, a pleasing and unblemished sacrifice, O thrice-blessed one, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst find the end of sickness and the delight which is in paradise, O father; for, through the narrow way thou didst attain unto the broad expanse of the kingdom, O most wise one, blessing Christ forever.

*Theotokion:* Behold, the Virgin gave birth unto the divine Babe, acknowledging Whom as God and Lord, the God-bearers now cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages.

O ye faithful, let us be glad on the day of the commemoration of the right glorious hieromartyr, crying out: Thee do we exalt supremely, O Christ, forever!

Beholding a hierarch fittingly adorned with the crown of martyrdom, we hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever.

Let us honor the favorite of the Trinity, who shed his blood for His sake, hymning and exalting the Lord supremely for all ages.

*Theotokion:* The unapproachable Light, Who dwelt within thee, O Virgin, hath shown thee to be a luminous and golden lamp forever.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy memorial is =celebrated place with praises=, O God-bearer; for thou wast shown to be a nurturer of righteousness, courage, wisdom and chastity, O wise father, crying out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With godly praises let us honor the God-bearer as one manifestly full of grace and enlightened thoroughly with divine splendors, who crieth out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The divinely wise fasters who were planted in godly manner by the virtues, yearned to philosophize with the desire for the hypostatic ­Wisdom which appeared to the world through thee, O all-immaculate Maiden, Whom the children bless, the priests hymn, and the people exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Ever-virgin, which was shown beforehand to the lawgiver in the burning bush for the salvation of us the faithful, let us magnify with unceasing hymns.

Thou wast shown to be a faithful shepherd of thy sheep, and didst bring thyself as a lamb to sacrifice to the Shepherd, and didst receive twofold glory. Wherefore, honoring thee, we call thee blessed.

Depicting thy lineaments with abstinence in hues of piety, O all-blessed one, thou didst show thy soul to be truly according to the image of God, O blessed one.

Preserving thy traditions inviolate and honoring thy suffering, O father, with unceasing hymns we piously bless the Trinity in the One Nature of the Godhead.

*Theotokion:* Those who oppose Thy Church, O Christ, do Thou crush with Thine arm for the sake of the Theotokos; and confirm the faithful Orthodox hierarchs, that we may magnify Thee unceasingly.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Heaven is struck with awe, and the ends of the earth are amazed, that God hath appeared to men in the flesh, and that thy womb hath become more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the legions of men and angels magnify thee as Theotokos.

Cleansed by the streams of thy tears, thou now delightest in the thrice-radiant Light, O Theoctistus; standing manifestly before It and illumined thoroughly with the rays emitted thereby, thou lookest down from on high upon us who keep thy memory, O most blessed one.

Armed with love and hope and protected with faith, thou didst set at naught the artifices and wiles of the enemy; and, as a crowned victor, thou now livest with the divine choirs of the angels and the venerable, around the throne of the King of all.

Having lived chastely, righteously and piously with men on earth, O divinely wise faster, ye shine in the heavens with the ranks of the incorporeal ones, delighting in the radiance of the Godhead, from whence, as victors, ye have rightly received crowns for your struggles.

*Theotokion:* O ye two divine, all-radiant and sacred fathers of godly wisdom, by your supplications ask ye that God send down peace upon the world and true oneness of mind and faith upon the Churches, through the right acceptable supplications of the Theotokos, O all-blessed ones.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “To the disciples...”—

O city of Nicomedia, rejoicing, bring forth today a choir for the annual commemoration of thy good shepherd, and leap for joy, having a watchman preserving thee who is greater than the bane of the enemy.

Theotokion—

With the apostles, entreat thy Son and Lord, O Theotokos, that He have mercy upon all who hymn and glorify thee, who honor thee in thine icons, venerating and kissing them lovingly, as is meet.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory..., the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone IV—

With the great city of Nicomedia all cities and lands celebrate today on the commemoration of its honored citizen; for the ends of the earth clap their hands, making merry on the present festival of the hieromartyr. And we, weaving wreaths of hymns as flowers, cry out to him: Rejoice, O good shepherd, who laid down thy life for thy sheep, thou sacrifice and sacrificer, priest and lamb! To thee do we pray, together with those who suffered with thee: O Anthimus, entreat Christ to deliver thy flock from alien wolves and to vouchsafe them to dwell with thee in the fold of heaven.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

The all-pure one, seeing Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, His side pierced with a spear, cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the thankless people rewarded Thee for the good works which Thou didst accomplish for them? And wilt Thou leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel at Thy voluntary crucifixion, O Compassionate One!”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia; four from the Octoechos, and four from Ode III of the canon of St. Anthimus.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews \(13:7-16, §334\).

Brethren: Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited those who have been occupied therein. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed in righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Reading from the Gospel

according to St. John \(10:9-16, §36\).

The Lord said to the Jew who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

