The 5th Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of the Martyred Monk Athanasius,

Abbot of Brest

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone VI—

O venerable father Athanasius, cleaving unto God through abstinence and prayer, thou didst mortify the passions and the intemperance of thy flesh, and didst show thyself to be a servant of the Almighty Savior. Wherefore, we revere thy most honored memory. *Twice*

Having first pleased God by thy struggle in this earthly life, thou didst reach the end of thy life in the suffering of martyrdom. Wherefore, Christ Who loveth mankind, the Savior of our souls, hath crowned thee for thy twofold struggles.

Thou didst hold nought more precious in this world than the purity of the Orthodox Faith, and for fearlessly preserving and preaching it wast put to death by the enemies thereof. Wherefore, Christ, the Judge of the contest, hath bestowed upon thee the wreath of victory.

Glory…, in the same tone—

With hymns let us praise today the venerable martyr Athanasius, the athlete of our land; for ­having loved Christ from childhood and eagerly followed His precepts, he served for the confirmation of the Orthodox Faith in the Russian land. And having now been received into the mansions of heaven, he entreateth Christ God to have mercy upon our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O radiant star who ineffably gavest birth to the Light Who shone forth from the Father before the morning star! With His radiance illumine the souls of us who sleep in the darkness and the shadow of death.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV—

Through the providence of God and the election of men thou wast made abbot of the monastery of Brest, O venerable martyr; and as a most excellent shepherd thou didst guide in the truth the flock entrusted to thee by God. Instruct us also, who honor thy memory with faith, how to establish ourselves in the true Faith.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Having spurned earthly things, O passion-bearer, as a sufferer for the Truth thou didst taste of celestial sweetness, preparing heavenly things for thyself. Ask thou of Christ our Savior, that He grant this sweetness also unto us, for thou art the advocate for our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Assembling today for the glorification of thy memory, O venerable martyr, thy faithful ones have been filled with joy and gladness; for by thy righteous life and thy firm stand for the Orthodox Faith thou dost not only show us the true path to heaven, but even now dost pray for the salvation of our souls, as our intercessor before the Lord.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Unto thy protection do we flee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we beseech thee to hasten quickly to the aid of us who honor thee with faith, and deliver us from enemies, visible and invisible. For thou art our help.

Troparion, in Tone II—

Blessed art thou, O Athanasius our father, for thou didst live by faith, standing vigilantly for the holy Orthodox Faith, ever chanting with compunction the akathist hymn to the all-pure one, admonishing all not to adulterate the holy Orthodox Faith, in witness to the Truth whereof thou didst suffer even unto the death. And, honoring thy holiness, we cry out to thee with boldness: O venerable martyr Athanasius our father, thou art our boast and adornment!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, O Theotokos; for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, thou art known to be a true Mother, having given birth unto God. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone VIII—

Having cleansed thy soul and body of the passions, thou becamest a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit; and having disdained the beautiful things of this world from thy youth, thou didst follow after Christ, rejoicing. Pray thou unto Him, as our intercessor, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy unto our souls. *Thrice*

Mortifying thy flesh with great asceticism, thou wast shown to be the adornment of monks, O venerable martyr, guiding them well, that they might reach heaven. Wherefore, enlighten us now who are in the darkness of sin, and as thou hast boldness before the Lord our Savior, beseech Him, that our souls be saved. *Thrice*

In thy life thou wast an unshakable pillar of the Faith of Christ and a true lover of the Traditions of the fathers, O venerable martyr, standing vigilantly for the holy Orthodox Faith. Confirm thou in the Faith our understanding, and us who honor thy memory with faith, unto the salvation of our souls. Offering thyself up as a sacrifice to God, in thy heart thou didst preserve the image of Christ, the ­unblemished Lamb Who gave Himself over to slaughter for the sins of the world, and emulating Him, thou didst sweetly commit thy soul into the hands of God. O thou who didst emulate the sufferings of Christ, beseech Him, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Glory…, in the same tone—

Loving the Lord God as it saith in the Gospels, thou didst adorn thy soul with spiritual virtues, becoming a model for thy faithful flock to emulate; and like a candle set upon a candlestand, thou hast enriched many with the understanding of divine knowledge. And having suffered for the Truth of Christ even unto the shedding of thy blood, thou hast been vouchsafed the grace of working miracles. In thy grace forget us not who are poor, that, glorifying the Lord Who gave thee such things, we may save our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and cameth forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, these stichera, in Tone II—

Come, ye faithful, let us honor the memory of the venerable martyr Athanasius, for he is the priceless spiritual pearl who adorneth the Russian land with the luster of faith and piety. Let us hasten in prayer to him who suffered for the holy Orthodox Faith—the teacher of abstinence, the wellspring of compunction, the heavenly man and earthly angel, who grieveth for our land,—and let us cry aloud with tears unto him: instruct us how to praise the Lord with Orthodox faith, for the salvation of our souls.

After thy repose, O venerable martyr, thy relics, showing forth a torrent of healings for those who have recourse unto thee, bear eloquent witness to thy glory, guiding us to the path which leadeth to life and piety, and proclaiming: Love ye the Lord, and ye shall find everlasting glory and rest with the elect, which may we obtain through thy supplications, O holy Athanasius.

Glory…, in the same tone—

Zealous for the Orthodox Faith, thou didst grieve with great sorrow when the Faith was being trampled underfoot by the heterodox. And praying before the icon of the all-pure Mistress during the days of thy tribulation, thou didst place all thy trust in her aid. And hearing the voice of the Theotokos issuing forth from the holy icon during the hour of thy fervent prayer, and heeding its commands, thou didst not only commit thy whole earthly life to the defense of the Faith of thy forefathers, but didst endure many persecutions for it, continually strengthened by the help of the Mother of God. O holy one, bear thy supplications up to the all-holy Theotokos.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone VI—

O Mistress Theotokos, thou art the defense and protection of Christians. With thy protection overshadow us who suffer cruelly, that we may unceasingly glorify thy loving-kindness.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV—

Rejoice, O venerable martyr Athanasius, chosen vessel of God, for, having loved Christ from thy youth, by a voice of command thou wast called to serve His Orthodox Church; and having labored for Him in the sweat of thy brow, thou didst guide the people with the light of the true Faith. Wherefore, by thy supplications ask now of Christ, the Bestower of light, that He grant peace and confirmation to our Church and enlightenment to our souls.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O leader of monks who wast chosen beforehand by the providence of God for this! For by the choice of God thou wast made abbot of the monastery of Brest, that by thy right praiseworthy life and by thy glorious stand in Holy Orthodoxy thou mightest magnify the Orthodox people in the right Faith. And having received the abbatial staff, thou didst do the will of Him Who sent thee forth to this struggle. Wherefore, we also cry aloud unto thee: O Athanasius our father, by thy supplications insure the good estate of our homes and communities.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

We bless thee, O venerable martyr Athanasius, for thou wast illumined with the light of heavenly knowledge in the workings of thy pastorship and thy defense of the Truth; for thou didst see a wondrous vision, beholding the regiments of the army of heaven vanquishing the persecutors of the true Church of Christ, and having armed thyself with trust in God, as a God-fearing man, thou didst rise up against the enemies of the Orthodox Faith, undaunted either by imprisonment, or fetters, or tortures, or death. But having endured all these, thou hast received from God the crown of victory. Wherefore, we beseech thee: entreat Christ God, that He protect our Church from the assaults of the enemy.

Glory…, in the same tone—

O father Athanasius, having suffered for the confession of the Faith, thou didst inherit all-radiant joy and all-honorable glory, and hast been shown to be a fellow heir to the city of Jerusalem on high and to everlasting good things. O vanquisher of the passions, great defender of the Faith, passion-bearer of Christ, most brilliant luminary of our land: in thy supplications remember all of us who keep thy sacred memory, that we may glorify our Savior Who hath glorified thee: our God Who alone resteth in His saints.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Look down upon the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, suppressing the grievous uprisings which oppress us, and taking away from us every tribulation; for thee alone do we have as a firm and excellent confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession. O Mistress, let us not be put to shame who call upon thee, but haste ye to make entreaty for those who cry aloud with faith: Rejoice, O Mistress, thou help of all, O joy, protection and salvation of our souls!

After the blessing of the loaves, the troparion, in Tone II—

Blessed art thou, O Athanasius our father, for thou didst live by faith, standing vigilantly for the holy Orthodox Faith, ever chanting with compunction the akathist hymn to the all-pure one, commanding all not to violate the holy Orthodox Faith, in witness to the Truth whereof thou didst suffer even unto the death. And, honoring thy holiness, we cry out to thee with boldness: O venerable martyr Athanasius our father, thou art our boast and adornment! *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the venerable martyr, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion in the same tone, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

In thine earthly life thou didst emulate the angels, O venerable martyr, for, humbling the most prideful enemy, thou didst bear thy cross in a manner pleasing unto God. Wherefore, honoring thy memory today, we pray: Entreat Him, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou gavest birth unto God the Word, having seedlessly conceived Him in thy womb, O Virgin who knewest not wedlock. Him do thou beseech in behalf of our souls.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

In thy firm stand for the Orthodox Faith and thy fearless confession thereof thou didst offer thyself up like a cluster of spiritual grapes on the altar of God, O venerable martyr. Wherefore, with hymns we ever faithfully praise thy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

How can we not marvel at thy birthgiving, which took place without the participation of man, O all-honored one? For in thee hath the wonder of thy conception and ineffable the form of thy birthgiving been shown to be. Entreat Him Who was born through thee, to forgive our transgressions.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable martyr Athanasius, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the mediation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII**—**

Beholding the holy Orthodox Faith mocked by heretics and betrayed by false brethren, and the Orthodox people led astray from the straight path of the Truth, thou gavest voice to sorrow and lamentation; and undaunted by the threats, privations and ill treatment to which thou wast subjected, thou didst continually stand forth as its champion and defender, denouncing the heterodox and their false doctrines which were leading the people into perdition, for which cause thou wast tortured and slain. O venerable martyr Athanasius, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

When the Latin-minded waged war upon the holy Orthodox Church, thou, O all-immaculate Mother of God, who ever carest for and watchest over thy people, didst manifest thy will unto the venerable Athanasius and enjoin him to defend the Holy Faith against the assaults launched against it by those who had betrayed and fallen away from the Faith of their fathers; and in him thou didst find a willing ally of the providence of God, ready to lay down his life for the flock of Christ. O all-pure and most blessed Mistress, with the martyr Athanasius beseech Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto us who with all generations of men and angels do ever call thee blessed.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Beloved of God from thy mother’s womb, thou wast sought out by Him as an instructor of the heavenly city, and, having pleased Him by thy glorious life, unto all who are in need of thine aid hast thou been shown to be a bestower of miracles. Save us, in that thou art our intercessor, O wonder-working Athanasius!

Canon of Supplication to the all-holy Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable martyr, with 8 troparia, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Of old, Moses divided the waters by the sign of the Cross, passing over the Red Sea with the Israelites, who attained unto the promised land; and thou, O venerable martyr, having mortified thy flesh in the bearing of thy cross, didst attain unto the promised land, wherein righteousness doth abide.

To God our Deliverer dost thou now chant a hymn of victory, illumined by the grace of the divine and radiant Savior. O holy Athanasius, illumine my benighted soul by thy supplications, that I may chant gloriously unto my God.

Honoring the memory of thee who, as a priest, as a confessor and as one who suffered for the Faith of Christ, hast been adorned, O all-praised one, we chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hath He been glorified in His saints!

*Theotokion:* Deliver me from enemies, visible and invisible, O thou who gavest birth to the Master of all, and still thou the tempest of my passions, that I may chant unto my God: For gloriously hast Thou be glorified!

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Established in divine love by the grace of the Holy Spirit, thou didst live piously, by thy word establishing thy flock in life-bearing pastures; and thou hast led many into the fold of heaven.

Having planted the feet of the faithful upon the rock of the Faith, thou didst shake the foundation of the adversaries and save thy people from enslavement to the enemy.

Adorning thyself with steadfastness of faith, thou didst attain thine uttermost desires, and hast been shown to be right pleasing to the Creator of the Church.

*Theotokion:* All the nations are at a loss to understand how the Fashioner of the vault of heaven, Who is in nowise limited by His creations, came to dwell, incarnate, in thy womb, O most immaculate one, unto the salvation of us who hymn thee with faith.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

Having manfully endured tribulations in preparing thyself for the life which is devoid of pain, thou hast taught us to possess our souls in patience. Wherefore, the Church of Christ, celebrating thy holy memory today, rejoiceth in splendor.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Wholly adorned with divine glory, thou hast surpassed the cherubim and seraphim, O all-immaculate one; wherefore, as is meet, all generations call thee blessed.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Rejoice in the Lord Who hath given thee victory over the incorporeal foe, O righteous one! Unto Him dost thou cry with boldness: thou art my strength, O Lord! Thou art my power! O Compassionate One, in Thy loving-kindness forsake not those who have recourse unto Thee!

The Master aiding thee, for thy struggles thou didst receive from Him the gift of curing bodily ailments and healing the most painful sufferings of those who cry out to Christ God: Glory to thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

From childhood thou didst love the Lord, for, shouldering the weapon of the Cross, thou didst advance unwaveringly, preparing the path of salvation for thyself thereby. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be an all-radiant advocate for the world, chanting unto Him a song of victory.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O Mistress who gavest birth unto Joy for the world. O most immaculate one, in that thou art good beseech Him, that He overlook the iniquities of those who cry out to Him as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine eyelids, but, rising at dawn, didst cry aloud: “O Lord, with Thy compassions visit Thy Church, which Thou hast acquired by Thy precious Blood!”

Reproving those in error by thy discourse, with the word of faith thou didst bind the reason-endowed flock entrusted to thee; and now thou dost shelter us from the winds of corrupting doctrine, teaching us to chant unto the Lord: Save us, for Thou art our God! We know none other than Thee!

Blessed was thy life on earth and immortal thine end; wherefore, thou hast acquired riches not subject to corruption, O venerable father, and with miracles dost enlighten those who have recourse unto thee.

*Theotokion:* In hymns do we magnify the all-immaculate Mary as the throne of the Master, as the animate bridal-chamber which received the King of kings.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Great sorrow oppresseth me, for grievously have I mired my soul with sins and sullied the garment of incorruption. But do thou, O holy one, instruct me how to entreat the Lord, that He cleanse me of the corruption of my passions.

Strengthened by divine understanding, thou didst denounce as mindless those who denied the true Faith of Christ. Wherefore, the gates of heaven have been opened unto thee, O blessed one, and thou dost hymn Christ for all ages.

Standing before the Trinity, purified by the Holy Spirit, thou art full of heavenly sweetness and all-radiant joy. By thy supplications do thou prevent us, who are in darkness and shadow, from drawing nigh unto hades.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Mother who gavest birth to the Redemption of the whole world from the curse of the law, accepting now our entreaties, pray thou, that we all be saved.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

By thy life, O Athanasius, thou didst show thyself to be an ornament of the monastic life and the adornment of martyrs; and thou didst shine forth like an all-radiant sun upon the Orthodox people. Wherefore, Christ hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles, that, honoring thine all-splendid memory, we may cry out to thee: In thy supplications be thou mindful of thy flock, O venerable one!

*Ikos:* Shaken by the false doctrines and the insidious machinations of its enemies, the Orthodox Church is beset as by waves of many waters. Yet with thee, O venerable martyr, we believe and trust that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and we entreat thee: Ask great mercy of the Lord, that in the day of our tribulations He send down upon us strength of spirit and a firm standing in the truth of Orthodoxy, that not one of our brethren be shown to be a child of perdition.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Enduring tortures, burned by material fire, thou didst bedew thy soul with immaterial fire, crying out in the midst of the flame like the three youths: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

By thy humility and dispassion, as with life-bearing dew, thou didst extinguish the fire of the rage of thine iniquitous tormentors, O venerable martyr; for they marvelled, beholding thee in the midst of tortures, praying for thine enemies.

Having girt thy loins about with the courage of the martyrs, and adorned thyself with thy life of ascetic struggle as with a splendid robe, as one of the elect thou didst hasten to the banquet of the Lord, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Just as the bush which Moses saw burned yet was not consumed, so didst thou, O Virgin, remain unconsumed when thou didst conceive the Sun of righteousness in thy womb. Him do thou beseech, that our souls be saved.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

We have thee as a tireless advocate stilling the waves of the passions, assuaging our griefs and delivering from evils all of us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having slain within thee the most prideful enemy of wisdom, by thy pure life and radiance of mind thou didst enter into communion with the divine Mind, crying unceasingly: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With right laudable hymns let us honor the excellent favorite of Christ as one manifestly full of grace and wholly adorned with divine effulgence, crying out to God the Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* “Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!”, the Archangel Gabriel announced to thee; for from thee hath issued forth, in His ineffable loving-kindness, the preëternal Child, the blessed and supremely exalted God of our fathers.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Continually making prostrations and chanting the akathist hymn to the all-pure one, thou didst cry aloud: “Rejoice, O guide of the world, adorned more than the angels of heaven! Adorn me with thy beauty, that I may appear before my Lord unashamed!”

Marvelling at thy condescension in the days of my youth, I beseech thee: Forsake me not in the days of mine old age, O venerable martyr, and after my death seek me out, that, purified by thy supplications, I may gaze with the eyes of my soul upon the heavenly bridal-chamber on the day of the dread judgment of the Lord.

O saint of God, remember now all who have recourse unto thee with faith, delivering us from the spiritual passions; turn misfortunes and evil circumstances away from us, and be thou for us a mediator of divine salvation.

*Theotokion:* In thee, O divinely chosen Mistress, we see an awesome and all-glorious wonder; for the Almighty Ruler of the world, abasing Himself, received flesh of thee, and, nourishing His people with His own all-pure Flesh, He leadeth them to life everlasting.

Exapostilarion—

The Latin-minded stopped their ears, unable to withstand the power of thy words as thou denounced their errors and their betrayal of the Faith of Christ and the Church of the apostles; wherefore, they cruelly tortured and put thee to death. Yet do thy voice and example continue through the ages to fill the right-believing people with steadfast loyalty to the Orthodox Faith of their fathers, that by the straight and narrow way of true doctrine they may attain unto the kingdom of heaven.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O all-blessed and most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, direct thou the gaze of thy loving-kindness upon us, thy wretched and unprofitable servants, and, even though we have defiled ourselves with all manner of sins and offenses, turn not thy face away from us; but with the venerable martyr Athanasius entreat Him Who without seed was born of thee, that He strengthen us to protect and defend the priceless treasure, the pearl of great price, the holy Orthodox Faith, our only adornment in this life and our hope of entering the kingdom of heaven.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, thou didst fight the good fight until the end, desiring to please God with all thy heart. And thou wast shown to be purified like gold in a crucible, shining with spiritual beauty upon thy children; and, ascending to the heights of the virtues by thy life, as by a ladder reaching up to the heavens, thou didst teach them to praise the Lord with majesty. Be thou mindful of us, O father Athanasius, that not only in this life, but with thee in the heavens, we may praise the Lord Who hath glorified thee. *Twice*

Our mind is at a loss what words of praise we may use to magnify the Creator Who in thee hath given us a wellspring of healings, all-radiant joy, a weapon against the assaults of the enemy, a tireless guardian for our land, and an advocate with God for our souls. Boldly chanting praise unto God with the choirs of heaven, teach us also to hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

O venerable father Athanasius, like a tree bearing lustrous fruit thou hast borne great fruit of the Spirit for the holy Orthodox Church, strengthening thy faithful flock in the Truth, admonishing those who have fallen away and making steadfast those who are wavering; for thou now partakest of the fruit of heaven as food. Establish us also in the Faith and in Truth, that we may live in purity of spirit and piety, glorifying our Savior unceasingly.

Glory…, in the same tone—

For the sake of Christ the Lord, O venerable martyr Athanasius, thou didst endure great labors and evils for the edification of His Holy Church. For thou didst not only stand for the Truth as firmly as a hard diamond, but as a confessor, unceasingly denouncing those who blaspheme the Orthodox Faith and foretelling for them the wrath of God, thou didst endure ill treatment, imprisonment, mockery and a martyr’s death therefor. For this cause, thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord and, dwelling now in the mansions of heaven, with the angels thou chantest unto the Lord hymnody of praise. Ask thou of the Lord great mercy for us, that together with thee we also may chant hymns of praise unto God in the age to come.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We beseech thee: Pray thou, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the venerable martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \[II Tim. 2: 1-9\]

Timothy my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please Him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elects’ sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 38

\[Mt. 10: 32-38\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man’s foes shall be those of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

An akathist hymn in honor of St. Athanasius is available as item\# 491

