The 6th Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of the Miracle performed by the Archangel Michael at Colossae, which is also known as Chonae.

Commemoration of the Martyr Eudoxius

and those who suffered with him.

At Vespers

“At Lord, I have cried..., six stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As valiant among the martyrs...”—

O Michael, supreme commander, shown forth as a most radiant intercessor before the three-Sunned Godhead, thou dost cry out, rejoicing with the heavenly hosts: Holy art Thou, O Father! Holy art Thou, O equally without beginning Son! Holy art Thou also, O Holy Spirit! One glory, one Kingdom and nature, one Godhead and power! *twice*

Thine aspect is fiery, and thy beauty wondrous, O Michael, first among angels, for in thine immaterial nature thou dost transcend the ends of the earth, fulfilling the commandments of the Creator of all, known in the power of thy might, making thy church a wellspring of healings, revered in thy holy name. *twice*

O Thou Who, as it is written, doth make Thine angels spirits and Thy ministers a flame of fire: amid the ranks of Thine archangels, O Lord, Thou hast shown forth as preëminent Michael, the supreme commander, who doth obey Thy behest, O Word, and with fear doth utter the thrice-holy hymn unto Thy glory. *twice*

Glory..., in Tone VI, the composition of the Byzantine—

Rejoice with us, all ye angelic legions, for the great supreme commander, your superior and our intercessor, appearing most wondrously this day in his honored temple, doth sanctify it. Wherefore, chanting as is meet, let us cry aloud to him: Cover us with the shelter of thy wings, O Michael, thou greatest of the archangels!

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Rejoice with us, all ye choirs of virgins, for our intercessor, mediator, protection and great refuge doth today on her divine and honored feast comfort the sorrowful. Wherefore, hymning her at length as is meet, let us cry aloud: Protect us with thy divine intercession, O all-pure Mistress Theotokos!

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone VIII, the composition of John the Monk—

O supreme commander, as general, champion and chief of the angels, from all want and grief, from afflictions and grievous sins do thou free those who hymn and beseech thee with faith, O glorious one, for thou art manifestly immaterial, beholding the Immaterial One, illumined with the unapproachable light of the Master’s glory. For in His love for mankind He took flesh of the Virgin for our sake, wishing to save the human race.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Supreme commander of the armies of Heaven, we, the unworthy, do ever entreat thee, that by thy prayers thou dost ever surround us with the protection of the wings of thine immaterial glory, preserving us who earnestly fall down before thee and cry aloud: Deliver us from misfortunes, in that thou art the leader of the hosts on high.

At Compline

Canon to the Martyr Eudoxius, chanted in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

O ye who desire to proclaim the glories of the martyrs, come, let us all praise Eudoxius, great among martyrs, holding festival with cymbals as did David.

Throughout the whole world went the impious command not to worship the living God, but idols. But thou, O martyr, didst worship thy God, the God of heaven.

*Glory...* O martyr Eudoxius, thou glory of the pious, true to thy name, amidst the unjust judges that wounded thee didst thou confess Christ God Who is unoriginate.

Now and ever...

O Mother who knewest not a husband, the ranks of angels and men unceasingly praise thee, for thou didst bear their Creator in thine arms as a babe.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Like a lamb wast thou led to the slaughter, O martyr Eudoxius, neither protesting, nor crying out, O most blessed one, emulating the life of Christ thy Teacher. Wherefore, thou hast received unending glory.

To those who served idols thou didst cry out, O martyr: My God liveth forever, but your gods are the works of men’s hands; falling, they cannot rise up, for they are inanimate, graven images!

Glory...

The arts of the enemy hast thou cast down, establishing thy mind upon the rock of the Church of Christ. Wherefore, thou didst cry out: This corruptible life do I leave for life everlasting!

Now and ever...

God the Word, equally enthroned and everlasting with the Father, wishing to restore the first of our race, took Adam’s hypostasis of thee, O pure one, finding thee to be the most holy of all women, O Mother of God.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Thou didst denounce the deception of those who sought to force thee to renounce everlasting life and to love a life of vanity.

Wounded, thou didst rejoice in the Word Who was slain in the flesh for our sake, and thou didst cry out to thy tormentors: My sufferings are undeserved!

Glory...

The gods whom ye serve have mouths, yet cannot speak! thou didst exclaim, O Eudoxius. “Let those who fashion them be like unto them!”

Now and ever...

As Thou art sinless, O Unknowable One, grant us purification, and calm Thou the world, O God, through the prayers of her who gave Thee birth.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

“Thou art my strength!” thou didst cry out, O Eudoxius. O Christ God Who suffered in the flesh, make me steadfast, for, lo! I suffer in torment.

“Thou art a treasury of entreaties, O Christ God! Disdain me not!” didst thou cry amid the tortures, O Eudoxius, stout of heart.

Glory...

Fearing neither the sword nor the fire, Eudoxius cried out to the tormentor: “Behold, I have the mighty strength of the God I serve!”

Now and ever...

Heal thou the weakness of my passions, O pure one, making me worthy of thy visitation, and by thine entreaties grant me health.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

“Neither the sword, nor fire shall separate me from the love of Christ; and I hold your threats to be like the pratings of children!” thou didst cry out with faith to those who sought to compel thee to sacrifice.

“I fear that tormenting fire which cannot be quenched, and I desire life which cannot be taken away!” thou didst cry out to the tormentor, O Eudoxius. Behold, O thou that woundest my body, I shall not serve thine idols!

Glory...

“The gods whom thou dost worship are gold and silver. They have mouths, but speak not; ears have they, yet hear not; legs they have, but cannot walk. But my God is the Creator of all!” thou didst exclaim.

Now and ever...

By thy prayers may we be delivered from grievous transgressions, O pure Theotokos, and may we acquire the radiance of the Son of God Who was ineffably incarnate of thee, O all-holy one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Having amassed heavenly riches, thou didst scatter them, offering them to the poor; and thy bread didst thou give unto the hungry. Wherefore, having acquired incorruptible life, thou didst shine forth in thy confession of Christ. Therefore, taking courage and suffering lawfully, thou hast received from God a crown for thy labors, O passion-bearer Eudoxius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Emulating the patience of the three youths, O most wise Eudoxius, thou didst not bend thy knee to the false image, but didst cry aloud with fervent faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Acquiring the invincible aid of grace, O martyr Eudoxius, thou didst firmly cast down the legions of the enemy, and having vanquished them thou didst cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Glory...

Aflame with the love of divine desire, O martyr Eudoxius, thou didst openly abominate transitory attachments, and, receiving thy reward, thou didst cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Now and ever...

Our all-good God, wishing to restore him who had fallen through deception, is incarnate and born of the Virgin and doth deify mankind.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst sail across an abyss of wounds and didst attain unto the harbor of life, O Eudoxius; and, receiving a crown of patience, with the angels thou dost unceasingly cry: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

To a place of rest hath Christ brought thee out who passed through fire and water, O blessed one; and rejoicing therein with the angels, O wise martyr, unceasingly thou dost chant a hymn to the Trinity: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Glory...

Thou didst destroy the noetic serpent with the help of the King of heaven, O glorious one; and receiving a crown of victory and patience, unceasingly thou dost cry out with the immaterial ones: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Now and ever...

The thrice-radiant Godhead which shineth forth in a single ray with one nature in three Hypostases: the unoriginate Father, the Word of one essence with the Father, and the consubstantial Spirit Who reigneth with them, ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

The armies of the angels were stricken with awe, and the assemblies of men were amazed that while possessing a corruptible and transitory nature thou didst show the demons to be wretched and weak; and with faith thou didst cry out: I shall serve the Trinity! Holy art Thou, O my Glory!

Blessed art thou, O martyr Eudoxius, and glorified for all generations, for in nowise sparing thy flesh, thou didst endure torments for Christ’s sake and didst not worship graven images. Wherefore, the ranks of angels, clothed in the raiment of incorruption, have crowned thee.

Glory...

By thy prayers unto God, O martyr Eudoxius, do thou rescue from every attack of the enemy those who with faith keep the memory of thy sufferings, that he may not boast over us; for, as a martyr, this thou art able to do, having received a reward for thy sufferings from the Most High.

Now and ever...

O Virgin Mother of God, thou art revealed as her who gave birth in the flesh unto God the Word, to Whom the Father, in that He is good, gave utterance from His own heart before all the ages, and Who is now known to be higher than all bodies, even though He hath clothed Himself in a body.

Stichera to the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

For thy virtues thou didst receive from the Savior grace befitting thy name, O martyr Eudoxius, and right boldly didst thou exchange thy life for the glory of martyrdom, and joining chorus with the angels in the heavens thou hast now been glorified as is meet.

For the severing of thy neck for the sake of thy faith thou didst crown thy head with a heavenly crown, O most blessed Eudoxius. Wherefore, cease not in thy prayers to Christ, that He remember us that keep thy memory, O glorious martyr.

Spurning wealth and this transitory life, O Eudoxius, like Moses thou didst reckon the bearing of Christ’s burden a divine boon greater than the glory of the world, O glorious one, approaching tortures and trials even to the shedding of thy blood.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Tempest-tossed upon the deep of transgressions, and fleeing to the calm haven of thine all-pure entreaty, I cry out to thee, O Theotokos: Stretch forth thy mighty right hand to thy servant, and save me!

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

Standing at the Cross of thy Son and God, and beholding His longsuffering, thou didst say,­ ­lamenting, O pure Mother: Woe is me, O my Child most sweet! What are these things which Thou sufferest unjustly, O Word of God? Mayest Thou save humanity!

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the troparia to the martyrs, and this canon to the archangel, with six troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the first of the bodiless intelligences,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O supreme commander of the armies of heaven, ever illumined with divine splendors, enlighten my mind, that I may hymn thee, O thou who art the confirmation of those who have recourse unto thee.

The all-unoriginate Mind showed thee, O most glorious supreme commander, to be the general of the supramundane ranks, a light unto those who are in darkness and a divine adornment of His Church.

Surpassing the heavenly intelligences in spirit, O most eminent Michael, thou wast given to them below as a wall of defense, confirmation, a weapon which slayeth and destroyeth the enemy.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate Virgin, thou splendor of the angels and aid of men, help me who sail the sea and ever venture into the tempest of sin and danger.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

With divine might dost thou encircle all the earth, O most praised chief among the angels, rescuing us that call upon thy divine name from the cruel enemy.

O supreme commander of God, of aspect most divine, thou hast been a divine herald, an undaunted intercessor for the faithful, a guide to those who are astray and an instructor.

Thou wast a most pure mirror of the splendor of God, radiantly reflecting the manifestation of the honored Spirit, O right wondrous Michael, first among the angels.

*Theotokion:* He Who by His own will wrought the immaterial intelligences made His abode within thy divine womb as was His desire, O all-immaculate one. The Unseeable is seen in the flesh.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Having become, as is meet, the leader of the ranks of heaven and minister of the glory of God, by the command of thy Creator, thou art a saving mediator, watching over mortals with thine immaterial glory. Wherefore, we all praise thee as is meet, chanting the hymns of thy divine feast today, O supreme commander Michael. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who lovingly hymn thy divine wonders.

Glory...; another Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “The choir of angels...”—

The choir of angels, having the divine Michael as its supreme commander, doth with him offer unceasing hymnody unto the Holy Trinity, for the Creator of all by His word brought the fiery ranks out of nonexistence.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou unceasingly entreat Him Whom thou didst bear in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding her Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the Tree, weeping, declared and maternally exclaimed: O my Son, my God most good, how canst Thou endure Thy descent and Thy voluntary sufferings?

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Being Thyself the supreme Intelligence, by Thy will Thou didst create the divine intelligences, and in their midst didst set Michael as a leader illumined with most blessed fellowship and radiant with the noetic ordinances of God.

O Michael most glorious, thou dost give utterance unto a holy hymn with the thrones, principalities, powers, authorities and sacred dominions, saving us who hymn thee.

We magnify the Creator and Lord of all Who, in His loving-kindness hath given us the luminous supreme commander Michael as a safeguard most great, an unassailable rampart and tower.

*Theotokion:* Of old the teacher of sacred truths noetically described the mystery of thy birthgiving, O Virgin, beholding thee most clearly in the Spirit as a mountain overshadowed, whence our holy God hath come forth incarnate.

Ode V

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

O bodiless Michael, supreme commander of the angels, thou didst appear leading Israel of old at the command of Him Who hath come forth out of Jacob and appeared unto men in the coarseness of a body.

Ever deified by immaterial splendors by partaking of the divine, and wondrously amazed, thou dost bestow enlightening radiance upon us, O thou who art first among the angels.

Thy divine temple is adorned with grace, for, entering therein, thou didst show it forth as an abyss of healings and a destroyer of passions, O Michael, first among the angels.

*Theotokion:* God hath shown thee to be more exalted than the noetic angels, having made His abode in thy womb, O pure and all-immaculate one. Him do thou ever beseech, that He spare those who hymn thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

The multitude of the faithful rejoiceth, praising thee, O Michael, and it doth glorify the all-holy Word Who in His goodness hath united men and angels.

Thou didst save the armies of Israel, revealing thyself and transmitting the commands of God, O supreme commander; and thou didst cast down the enemy and didst utterly destroy them.

Seized with fear and reverence, Joshua, son of Nun, bowed down when he beheld thee, O chief of the angels, asking thine honored and holy name.

*Theotokion:* Blessed are the people who ever bless thee, O blessed one, who gavest birth unto the blessed God, Who, in His loving-kindness, hath deified mortal man by an ineffable union.

Kontakion, in Tone II—

O chief commander of God, minister of glory divine, captain of the angels and instructor of men: beg thou great mercy and that which is profitable for us, for thou art the supreme commander of the bodiless hosts.

*Ikos:* In Thy Scriptures, O immortal One Who lovest mankind, Thou didst say that a multitude of angels rejoiceth in heaven over one man who repenteth. Wherefore, O Sinless One, Who alone knowest the hearts of men, amid our transgressions we ever make bold to beseech Thee to have compassion and to send down compunction upon us, unworthy though we are, granting us forgiveness, O Master, in that Thou art compassionate; for the supreme commander of the bodiless hosts doth entreat Thee in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Beholding, Daniel saw thee, O blessed Gabriel of lightning-bright visage, standing together with Michael, the supreme commander, who commanded thee to cause him to understand the vision which he had seen by the banks of the Ulai.

With faith let us shout the praises of the radiant Michael and Gabriel, chiefs among the angels that behold God, our good comforters, intercessors and protectors.

Being comely, most splendid and of godly aspect, in manner surpassing understanding art thou the chief of the immaterial spirits, O most radiant Michael; with them, therefore, pray thou in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* Beholding the truly ever-existent Word of the great Mind making His abode within thee in a strange and ineffable manner, O Virgin, the Archangel Gabriel cried aloud: Rejoice, O blessed throne of the Most High!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O Michael, thou hast been shown to be a commander of the noetic and bodiless hosts, a saving intercessor for men, a divine servant of God, chanting unceasingly: Bless and hymn the Lord, ye works!

O archangels Gabriel and Michael, two beacons most radiant, enlightening creation with the splendor of the thrice-radiant Godhead: dispel ye the gloom of the wicked.

O archangels, as good pilots to the harbor of the divine will bring ye safely the ship of my soul which hath encountered a tempest of sins and is in distress.

*Theotokion:* Standing before thee, the archangel, as divine adorner of the bride, greeted thee: Rejoice, unwedded Bride of God, thou glory of the angels, salvation and defense of men!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Behold, O archangel, the resplendent magnificence of thy divine temple which putteth forth lightning flashes of miracles through thy radiant presence, and it doth ever dispel the darkness of infirmities with divine grace.

As a comely and beauteous pair ye minister unto those who are on earth at the behest of the Master, O archangels, rescuing them from evil circumstances and sending down divine illumination upon all through the Spirit of God.

Today the bodiless and divine intelligences rejoice with us, beholding their great and splendid supreme commander hymned by all; and with us they lovingly keep festival, magnifying the Bestower of life.

O archangels, divine and radiant pair, Michael most honorable and Gabriel all-glorious: interceding before the honored Trinity, deliver us who praise you from torment and the cause of transgression.

*Theotokion:* Joyously we offer thee the cry of the divine Gabriel, exclaiming: Rejoice, all-pure paradise which hath borne within thee the Tree of life, thou most glorious palace of the Word! Rejoice, O all-immaculate Virgin!

Exapostilarion—

As of old thou didst subdue the raging flow and thundering of the river, O glorious supreme commander, so now destroy the pride of the heathen and the raging of the demons, that we may fittingly honor thee as is meet.

Theotokion—

The ranks of the bodiless hosts honor thy birthgiving, for thou alone hast filled mortals with joy. Wherefore, we, the faithful, glorify thee the all-immaculate one, singing the praises of thy glory in hymns, for thou hast shone forth light upon those who are in darkness, like the dawn which shineth forth in the morning.

At the Praises, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

Keeping festival in the world like angels, let us give voice unto a hymn to God Who sitteth upon a throne of glory: Holy art Thou, O heavenly Father! Holy art Thou, O equally everlasting Son! Holy art Thou also, O most Holy Spirit! *twice*

O Michael, supreme commander, who dost thyself behold ineffable things, who in boldness art preëminent among the many inhabitants of heaven, standing before the dread throne in glory: by thy prayers save us who find ourselves amid want, misfortune and temptations, we beseech thee!

Truly thou art first among the bodiless angels, a minister of the divine effulgence of God, an initiate of the mysteries of God who dost thyself behold Him. O Michael, supreme commander, save us who each year piously honor thee and hymn the Trinity with faith!

Glory..., in the same tone—

Michael, the commander of the host on high, preëminent among the divine ranks, hath summoned us today to his festival. He is ever with us, preserving all from every evil circumstance wrought by the devil. Come ye, therefore, O ye that love the feasts of the Church and love Christ, and, taking up the flowers of the virtues, with pure thoughts and an upright conscience let us honor the assembly of the archangels, for, standing ever before God and chanting the thrice-holy hymn, it doth pray that our souls be saved.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...”—

Beholding Christ hanging upon the Tree, the Virgin said: “O my Son, a sword hath pierced my heart and it is rent, as Simeon foretold to me of old, O Master! But arise, I pray, and do Thou Thyself glorify Thy Mother and handmaid with immortality!”

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory..., in Tone V—

Where thy grace doth shine forth, O archangel, thence is the power of the devil driven away, for the fallen morning star cannot endure the sight of thy light. Wherefore, we entreat thee: by thy mediation quench thou the fiery darts which he launcheth against us, and deliver us from his snares, O right lauded Michael, supreme commander!

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...”—

The ewe-lamb, once beholding her Lamb hastening to the slaughter, with fervor followed after, crying out to Him: “Whither goest Thou, O Christ, my Child most sweet? For what cause dost Thou run this fleeting course so swiftly? O Jesus, most desired and sinless, most merciful Lord, grant utterance unto me, Thy handmaid! O my Son most beloved, Compassionate One, do not pass me by in silence, for I gave Thee birth in manner most strange! O most compassionate God, grant the world Thy great mercy!”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia: four each from Odes III and VI of the canon to the archangel.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

*Stichos:* Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified exceedingly.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews §205 \(2:2-10\).

Brethren: If the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by those who heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will? For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.

Alleluia, in Tone V—

*Stichos:* Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His hosts.

*Stichos:* For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were created.

Reading from the Gospel

according to St. Luke §51 \(10:16-21\).

The Lord said to His disciples: He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him who sent me. And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Communion Verse—

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

