**The Sunday Before The** **6th DAY of the month of SEPTEMBER**
{{text_align=center}}

**Commemoration of the Righteous Prince Peter, Whose Name in Monasticism was David, & the Princess Febronia, Whose Name in Monasticism was Euphrosynia, Wonderworkers of Murom**
{{text_align=center}}

**At Great Vespers**
{{text_align=center}}

*After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.*

*On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone IV, the composition of Pachomius the Monk: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…"—*

Come, O ye faithful, and assembling spiritually today, let us praise our helpers as lovers of chastity who trampled down the all-prideful serpent, the pious Peter and Febronia, the wonderworkers of Murom, who entreat Christ for the salvation of our souls. *Twice*

The most splendid day of your commemoration hath arrived, O all-glorious Peter and all-wise Febronia, overshadowing the newly chosen people. Wherefore, beseech Christ for the salvation of all who unceasingly honor you with love, O blessed wonderworkers of Murom.

At first ye labored for Christ from your youth, O all-lauded ones, spurning the things of this world as though they were dung; wherefore, through almsgiving and prayers ye were well pleasing to Him. For this cause, even after death ye impart healing unto all who honor you with faith.

*And 4 in Tone II, the composition of Michael the Monk: Spec. Mel.: "With what wreaths of praise…"*

With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the blessed Peter and the all-wise Febronia, who though in separate bodies were united by grace? For the one vanquished the all-crafty serpent, and the other preserved her chastity. For this cause, having assembled, we chant hymns of joy, saying thus: Rejoice, O all-lauded ones, ye boast of the Orthodox, help of the land of Russia and preservers of your homeland, for, possessed of great mercy, Christ God hath crowned you with wreaths of immortal glory.

With what beauties of hymnody shall we praise the blessed Peter and the all-lauded Febronia? As on wings of divine understanding they soared aloft from the earth to heaven and drew nigh to the throne of the Holy Trinity, in gladness joining chorus with the angels, praying to Christ for the goodly order of the world and the preservation of the Russian land from hostile invasion and civil strife, O ye whom they praise with love and unceasingly honor, O wonderworkers of Murom.

With what spiritual hymns shall we praise the blessed ones who were joined together by love? With hymns of joy let us chant, saying thus: Rejoice, O blessed, thrice-blessed ones, who dwelt in godly love, who maintained humility and asceticism, giving alms, of which Christ Himself said: Blessed art the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. For this cause let us cry out to them thus: O all-glorious Peter and all-wise Febronia, entreat Christ in behalf of the city of your kin, that He send down upon us peace and great mercy.

With what humble mouths shall we hymn the blessed Peter and the all-honored Febronia, who in the Russian land were shown to be new wonderworkers and inextinguishable beacons? For they are the all-radiant stars of the noetic Sun, illumining the whole world with the radiance of miracles; the consolation of the grieving; the deliverance of captives from bitter slavery; the might and bulwark of our city. Wherefore, come, all ye faithful, and with psalms let us celebrate the feast of the blessed ones: that through their supplications Christ, Who hath great mercy, may cast down all the wiles of the enemy.

*Glory…: Idiomelon, in Tone VI—*

Blessed and thrice blessed is your homeland. Blessed is the city wherein ye dwelt. And blessed and holy is the church wherein your precious bodies were laid, O all-glorious Peter and all-wise Febronia. Pray ye to Christ, Whom ye loved from your youth, that He preserve your homeland and grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

*Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—*

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

*Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:*

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord's hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armour, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye who be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye who rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

*Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: "O house of Epohratha…"—*

Ye have been shown to the whole world like the great sun, O blessed ones, illumining all the earth with miracles; wherefore, assembling, we all hymn you.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Shining with the light of divine grace, your most splendid feast is a source of joy for all; and rejoicing thereon, we all praise you earnestly.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Come ye people of Murom, ye great and small, let us praise those who once reigned among you, the fervent intercessors and new wonderworkers Peter and Febronia.

*Glory…: Idiomelon, in Tone VIII—*

Rejoice and be glad in the Lord, O city of Murom! Celebrate with splendor and join chorus, O church of God wherein lieth a precious treasure: the all-glorious new wonderworkers Peter the pious and Febronia the all-wise, a treasure beyond price, the all-glorious shrine of their bodies that pour forth miracles upon all who approach with faith. Wherefore, come, ye faithful people, and having assembled let us bow down before the saints. Haste ye, and having come together clap your hands as say the psalms, and joining chorus, rejoice and in gladness say thus: Rejoice, all-glorious wonderworkers, blessed Peter and divinely wise Febronia, for ye are the confirmation of our city and the salvation of us, the faithful. And now, on the day of your commemoration, ask of Christ that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

*Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—*

O unwedded Virgin who didst ineffably conceive God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

*Troparion of the saints, in Tone VIII—*

Having lived well in piety, O blessed Peter, thou wast like a most precious offshoot of the root of piety; and thus having pleased God in peace with thy spouse, the all-wise Febronia, ye were vouchsafed the life of the holy monastics. With them pray ye to the Lord, that He preserve your homeland unharmed, that we may honor you unceasingly.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, didst cast down death by death, and as God didst reveal the resurrection: Disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

**At Matins**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saints, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion, in the tone of the saint’s troparion.*

*After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: "The choir of angels…"—*

Let us all celebrate together the most holy memorial of the all-wise Peter and Febronia, for the Church rendereth glory, crying out to them: Through your supplications, O blessed ones, heal our infirmities and diseases, and deliver from all temptations those who with faith praise your memory. *Twice*

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Creation rejoiceth, beholding in thee the miracle of miracles, O thou who art full of grace; for thou didst conceive without seed and gavest birth ineffably unto Him upon Whom the ranks of angels are unable to gaze. Him do thou entreat in behalf of our souls.

*After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: "Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…"—*

Ye possess the spirit of truth, O all-wise ones; wherefore, we, the faithful assembled, magnify your memory and venerate your precious shrine, receiving healings in abundance. And, chanting, we say thus: O all-glorious Peter, with Febronia thy spouse, beseech Christ, that He preserve our homeland, put down the civil strife of our passions, and grant us great mercy. *Twice*

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Awed by the beauty of thy virginity and thine all-radiant purity, Gabriel, marvelling, cried out to thee, Theotokos: “What praise can I bring which is worthy of thee? What shall I call thee? I am at a loss and filled with awe! Wherefore, as I have been commanded, I cry unto thee: ‘Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!’”

*Polyeleos, and this magnification—*

We bless you, O holy wonderworkers Peter and Febronia, and we honor your holy memory; for ye entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

*Selected Psalm verses—*

A Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. \[Ps. 111: 1\]

B In His commandments shall he greatly delight.

\[Ps. 111: 1\]

A His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

\[Ps. 111: 2\]

B And his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 111: 3\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B Lo, my lips I shall not restrain, O Lord.

\[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thou hast understood My righteousness and My truth.

B And my tongue shall treat of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. \[Ps. 34: 28\]

A A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

B The generation of the upright shall be blessed. \[Ps. 111: 2\]

A With glory and honor hast Thou crowned him.

\[Ps. 8: 6\]

B For Thou shalt bless the righteous, O Lord. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

A As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

B Whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us. \[Lk. 1: 78\]

A To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. \[Lk 1: 79\]

B To guide our feet into the way of peace.

\[Lk. 1: 79\]

Glory…, Now & Ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

*After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: "Of the Wisdom…"—*

Come, all ye people, let us offer praise to the all-glorious and divinely wise wonderworkers Peter and Febronia, crying out thus: Rejoice, O all-blessed Peter, who didst destroy the savagery of the prideful serpent! May thou and thy spouse now be helpers and mediators for your homeland, casting down the pride of the adversaries and asking remission of sins for those who honor your holy memory with love. *Twice*

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

All creation—the assembly of angels and the human race—rejoiceth in thee, O thou who art full of grace, O sacred temple and reason-endowed paradise, thou boast of virgins, from whom God, Who existeth from before time, was incarnate and became a child; for He made thy loins a throne, and thy womb He made more spacious than the heavens. All creation rejoiceth in thee, O thou who art full of grace. Glory to thee!

*Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone IV—*

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

*“Let every breath praise the Lord.”*

Gospel according to Matthew, § 43
{{text_align=center}}

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

*After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—*

O every city and land, rejoice with our glorious city, and as say the psalms, clap your hands together, celebrating today the spiritual triumph of the pious Peter and the glorious Febronia; and render ye praise with hymns, celebrating this most honored day and crying out thus in gladness: Accept the hymnody of your people, O blessed ones, and grant healing and great mercy in abundance unto those who entreat you.

*Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and 2 canons of the saints, with a total of 8 troparia.*

Ode I
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: "I chant praise unto the Life-bearing Maiden", in Tone I—*

*Irmos:* Traversing the impassible, uncommon path of the sea dryshod, Israel the chosen cried aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for He hath been glorified!

The immaterial ladder of old, and the path of the sea made strangely firm, revealed thy birthgiving, O pure one. Her do we all hymn, for she hath been glorified!

The power of the Most High, the perfect Hypostasis, the Wisdom of God incarnate of thee, O all-pure one, hath conversed with men, for He hath been glorified!

The Sun of thy righteousness hath passed through the impassible door of thy locked womb, O pure one, and hath shone forth upon the world, for He hath been glorified!

*Canon I of the saints, in Tone VIII—*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

O God, grant that I may offer hymnody unto Peter, Who was pleasing unto Thee and glorified Thee on earth, that I may magnify Thee, the Giver of understanding, with hymns.

To your homeland hath Christ shown you to be like an all-radiant sun, illumining with miracles all who have recourse to you with faith.

Having given no mind to the things of the body, hated earthly things as corruptible and renounced the world, ye have been vouchsafed the honor of the venerable. With them pray ye for the world.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Ever-virgin Theotokos, who gavest birth in the body to the eternal Word of the unoriginate Father, unto Him do we now cry aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

*Canon II of the saints, the composition of Michael the Monk, in Tone I—*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Assembling, let us praise as it meet the crowned and pious Peter and Febronia, the bestowers of abundant miracles, who save our souls.

With hymns and spiritual songs let us praise the blessed ones, crying thus: Rejoice, O all-lauded ones, all-radiant luminaries and steadfast helpers of our homeland!

Even though in the latter years the newly-enlightened Russian land gave rise to these blessed ones, yet have they been vouchsafed the honor of the ancients; for they impart gifts of miracles in abundance unto those who flee to them.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, with thy light drive the gloom from my mind and deliver me from everlasting darkness, that I may hymn thy mighty works.

Ode III
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty hath been broken by Thy might, O Christ, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power.

He Who, as the Creator of time, is outside of all time, O Virgin, willingly made Himself a Child through thee.

Let us hymn the womb that is far more spacious than the heavens, through which Adam came to make his abode in the heavens, rejoicing.

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Be thou a helper for the helpless and merciful consolation for the grieving, O blessed Peter, that, delivered by your supplications, we may honor thee.

As thou didst once commit the serpent to utter destruction, slaying him, O thrice blessed one, so now vanquish those who make war upon thy homeland, that we may glorify thee.

Behold our despondency; behold our grief; behold the misfortune that the enemy bringeth upon us! Wherefore, change it by your prayer unto the Lord, O Peter, that we may piously honor thee.

*Theotokion:* Thee have all of us Christians acquired as a refuge and bulwark, and thee do we unceasingly glorify, O thou who knewest not wedlock.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

To the Russian lands hath God shown thee to be glorious in miracles, O all-blessed Peter, and hath adorned thee with heavenly gifts. Him do thou now entreat, that He have mercy on us all.

O all-radiant beacons shining like another sun, illumine us who keep your memory, O all-blessed Peter and Febronia.

A conduit of gladness hath opened for us: the splendid day of the all-wise Peter and Febronia, who grant great mercy unto those who hymn them with faith.

*Theotokion:* Deliver us from all perils, from the many temptations of the serpent and from darkness, O most immaculate one who for us gavest birth to the never-waning Light.

*Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—*

O ye faithful, let us hasten to the blessed and splendid solemnity of Peter and Febronia as to the shining sun, and let us unceasingly cry out: Even though ye have passed from this earth, O all-glorious ones, ye have not parted from us, but stand with the angels before the Trinity, Whom do ye entreat, that our souls be saved.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Christ our God Who became incarnate of thee have we acknowledged to be the Word of the Father, O Virgin Theotokos who alone art pure, alone art blessed. Wherefore, chanting, we unceasingly magnify thee.

Ode IV
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, of Thy glorious dispensation, and I have glorified Thine unapproachable power, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Behold! the most manifest Mother of God, the divine mountain of the house of the Lord, is exalted far above the hosts of heaven.

O Virgin, who, alone outside the laws of nature, gavest birth unto the Ruler of creation: thou hast been vouchsafed a divine calling.

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

As a mediator and helper of thy homeland, be thou as one who scattereth the adversary, as an ally of thy people, who glorify thee, O Peter.

As ye dwell in the mansions of heaven with the venerable and the righteous, O all-blessed Peter and Febronia, never cease to pray for thy people.

Thee do we beseech, O all-blessed one: quell the uprisings of adversaries and ease the infirmities of men, that we may magnify thee with voices of praise.

*Theotokion:* Grant us cleansing from our transgressions, in that Thou art all-good, and bring peace to Thy world, O God, through the supplications of her who gave Thee birth.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Once, slaying the serpent, O blessed one, thou didst commit him to utter destruction. And so now also preserve thy homeland unassailed, O Peter, with Febronia, by thy supplications.

Illumining your splendid feast with the radiance of the grace of the threefold Sun, O blessed one, from the passion-fraught darkness of the demons deliver those who keep thy memory with faith.

Today the holy festal day calleth the flock of monks to gladness, to a spiritual banquet, to the food of life incorruptible, to the divine delight of the wonderworkers.

*Theotokion:* Understanding through the Spirit of God, the prophet described thee beforehand as the mountain overshadowed, O pure one. By thy mediation, O Virgin, cool thou my soul, which withereth beneath the burning heat of many transgressions, for thou alone art the correction of men.

Ode V
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, and the Sun hath shone forth from the Virgin's womb, granting the enlightenment of the knowledge of God to those who have gone astray in darkness.

Clouds of darkness rain down delight upon those who are on earth, for unto us hath a Child been given, Who hath existed from before the ages: our God, Who is incarnate of the Virgin.

Light hath shone forth upon my life and my flesh, and hath dispelled the gloom of sin: the most Exalted One, Who in the latter days was incarnate without seed of the Virgin.

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

The ground that received your precious bodies hath been sanctified, O divinely blessed Peter and Febronia; and receiving healing through you, men glorify Christ Who hath glorified you with might.

Even though ye have passed from this earth, yet have ye attained unto the abodes of heaven, where ye stand with the angels before the Trinity, Whom do ye entreat, that those who honor you with love may be saved, O blessed ones.

Having acquired you as all-radiant stars and a never-setting sun, your homeland boasteth, cherishing your all-honored memory, O Peter and Febronia.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, who art virgin even after giving birth, O Theotokos; for for us thou gavest birth in the flesh to God the Word, to Whom we all cry out thus: Make straight our paths, we pray Thee!

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light upon us who rise early unto the judgments of Thy commandments, O Master Christ our God, Who lovest mankind.

O all-good twain! O all-radiant beacons! O goodly couple, who art a single light in two bodies! O ye who were goodly lamps unto your own life! FTaking up the yoke of the Lord, ye followed Him with all your soul.

Your right wondrous and all-glorious memorial hath dawned in the Russian land, O blessed ones, and filleth with joy and gladness the assembly of the faithful, who earnestly glorify you in hymns, O holy ones.

O ye hierarchs and priests, ye monks and lay folk, ye elders and youths, and people of every age: leap up with splendor, magnifying the memory of the all-glorious Peter and Febronia in hymns.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden, thou splendid temple of Christ, by thy supplications to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit make us also to be temples, O all-pure one, rendering us venerable.

Ode VI
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Hearkening unto the sound of cries of entreaty from a soul in pain, O Master, deliver me from my grievous sins, for Thou alone art the Cause of our salvation.

Human nature, enslaved to sin, hath obtained freedom through thee, O pure Lady; for thy Son hath been sacrificed like a lamb.

We all cry out to thee, the true Mother of God: Save thou thy servants, the objects of wrath, for thou alone hast boldness before thy Son.

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* . Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

O all-honored couple! O great luminaries! Sanctify and glorify those who with love glorify you in hymns, O wonderworkers.

As an all-radiant twain and an all-honored summit and couple, who took up the yoke of the Lord, ye served Him with all your soul.

As good counselors for your own way of life, possessing a single mind in two bodies, ye illumine the world with miracles; wherefore, illumine us also by your supplications.

*Theotokion:* The voices of the prophets make clear that thou art the Mother of God, O Virgin; and beholding the fulfillment of their honored prophecies, we also hymn thee, who art truly the abode of virginity and purity.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Imitating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free my life from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

From a most honorable root didst thou arise, an all-glorious scion, O Peter; and having lived on earth in piety, thou becamest a pure receptacle of the Holy Spirit, Who enlighteneth those who now hymn thy memory.

The land of Russia is now filled with gladness on the appointed day of your feast, O all-glorious wonderworkers; and chanting, it saith thus: Entreat Christ to preserve your homeland from alien nations.

Ye are the helpers of orphans and widows, unassailable allies amid tribulations, the calm haven of all who have recourse unto you, and their true consolation amid sins.

*Theotokion:* Christ our God hath wrought mighty works in thee, O pure one. Him do thou ever beseech, that in us also He may magnify His mercy, O all-immaculate Mistress.

*Kontakion, in Tone VIII—*

Pondering the transitory glory and governance of this world, for this thou didst live piously in peace with the all-wise Febronia thy spouse, O Peter, pleasing God with almsgiving and prayers. Wherefore, lying inseparably in the tomb even after death, ye invisibly impart healing.. Pray ye now unto Christ, that He preserve your city and the people who glorify you.

*Ikos:* Make clear my tongue and pacify my heart; enlarge my mouth and fill it with the Spirit and wisdom, that therewith I may give utterance and chant thus to Thy wonderworkers: Rejoice with the all-praised Febronia, O blessed Peter;. Rejoice, allies of the land of Russia and helpers of Orthodox princes! Rejoice, preservers of our homeland and confirmation of our city! O all-honored twain and goodly couple, pray ye to Christ, that He preserve the city and people who glorify you!

Ode VII
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The youths of old showed themselves to be rhetors with the greatest love of wisdom, for, theologizing with their lips, they sang from the depths of their God-pleasing souls: O most divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

At night Jacob beheld God as in a dream, and He Who was incarnate of thee hath manifested Himself in splendor unto those who chant: Most divine and supremely glorified is the God of our fathers!

He Who wrestled with Jacob, prefiguring the ineffable union in thee, O pure one, whereby He willingly united Himself to mankind, is the most divine and supremely glorified God of our fathers!

The vile one who had not proclaimed Thee, the Son of the Virgin, to be One of the all-hymned Trinity, cried out with steadfast thought and with his tongue: Most divine and supremely glorified is the God of our fathers!

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O all-blessed Peter and all-praised Febronia, deliver those who flee unto you amid sickness and who cry out unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Be ye a refuge for all and tranquility untouched by storms for those amid sins, that with you we also may cry out to Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art

Thou!

Be ye a refuge for me on the day of wrath, O divinely blessed ones, for I walk among many snares; wherefore, deliver me from them, that I may hymn you.

Today the all-glorious memorial of Peter and Febronia hath shone forth in the world like the sun; and gathering together for it, we all chant thus: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* The Drop, divinely flowing, that was born of thee, O Virgin Theotokos, hath sanctified the world. Pour forth upon me the drops of mercy that sanctify the souls and minds of those on earth.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The young men raised together in piety, disdaining the impious command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Among all lands did the word spread that all-glorious wonderworkers had appeared to the city of Murom, who grant a multitude of healings unto all who have recourse unto them and hymn them with faith.

Lo! From all cities and lands have hierarchs and priests, monks and lay folk, the rich and the poor, hastened now, all of them rejoicing together, to render praise unto you, O ye who are blessed of God.

Like a flower didst thou flourish in thy miracles, O all-glorious Peter, as saith the prophet: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree. Wherefore, all of us now glorify thee, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Thee, O most holy and pure one, do thy servants ever entreat, day and night, with contrite mind, asking that we be granted deliverance from our sins through thy supplications.

Ode VIII
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The thrice-blessed youths, disdaining the golden image and beholding the immutable and living image of God, chanted in the midst of the fire: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Through thee did He Who is incomparable in grace and might become visible on earth and dwell with men. Chanting unto Him, O all ye faithful, let us cry out: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly proclaiming thee the pure one, we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou gavest birth to the One of the Trinity Who became incarnate. And to Him, with the Father and the Spirit, we sing: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Wash away and forgive our offenses, O Sinless One, through the supplications of Peter and Febronia who pleased Thee, that we may hymn Thee, O Christ, forever.

Accept the praise offered thee offered thee with an unworthy hand from the depths of my heart, O blessed ones, and make entreaty in our behalf unto Christ God.

*Triadicon:* Remit the offenses of the singers who hymn Thee, O all-holy Trinity, in that Thou art all-good, through the supplications of Peter and Febronia, that we may hymn Thee forever.

*Theotokion:* As thou art the vessel of divinity, O pure one, enlighten me, that I may walk in the commandments of the Light Who shone forth from thy womb and hath illumined the hearts of the faithful, O all-pure one,.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The ranks of angels praise you, O all-glorious ones, and the generations of men hymn you unceasingly, celebrating your memory with faith.

O Christ God, grant me the intelligence and sense to hymn the all-glorious wonderworkers with worthy praises, that, rejoicing, I may hymn their memory.

Truly victory hath been proclaimed by the faithful, for Peter and Febronia have shown themselves to be mighty allies amid misfortunes.

*Theotokion:* Cure the passions of my heart, O all-pure one who gavest birth to God the King; and show me to share in the lot of the righteous, O Virgin Theotokos, entreating Christ thy Son.

Ode IX
{{text_align=center}}

Canon of the Theotokos
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Thou art all desire, all sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the Virgin, God of gods, all-holy Lord of the saints. Wherefore, we magnify Thee and her who gaveth Thee birth.

In thy womb, O pure one, the Word of God was given to corruptible nature as a staff of strength. And He restored what had been dragged down to hell. Wherefore, we magnify thee, O all-pure one, as the Theotokos.

O Master, mercifully accept Thy Mother as an intercessor in our behalf, as Thou hast willed, and all things will be filled with Thy goodness, that we all may magnify Thee as our Benefactor.

Canon I of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Possessed of a conscience pure before God from your youth, ye therefore lived in piety and have passed over to the Most High. Entreat Christ God in our behalf, that we may honor you with love.

As ye stand before the Holy Trinity with the venerable and the righteous, O blessed ones, pray ye that He deliver us from wrath and every threat, that we may unceasingly magnify you.

Thy people beseech thee, O Peter blessed of God: with the all-wise Febronia, with whom ye lived a God-pleasing life in the world, entreat Christ to deliver us from all evils.

*Theotokion:* O great wonder! How did Christ God, Whom naught can contain, make His abode in thy womb? Beseech Him in behalf of those who praise thee, O Virgin, that He ever deliver us from misfortunes and from iniquitous men.

Canon II of the Saints
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the beginningless Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

Comely of soul and body, and resplendent in piety, O glorious Peter, full of divine understanding and wisdom thou wast an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and thou hast passed over, rejoicing, to immortal life, to endless bliss.

Your feast hath appeared like he morn, like the radiant day, O glorious ones, and all manner of healings pour forth from your shrine like a stream, watering the hearts of the faithful, who honor you with love.

Thou hast been found to be a great shield and a mighty fortress for the land of Russia, O blessed Peter and Febronia, the boast of the Orthodox people and their glory among all the nations. And now we beseech you to preserve our homeland from barbarian invasion.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one who gavest birth to the divine Light, enlighten me who am benighted by all the assaults of the evil one, who live in despondency and anger God, and guide me unto good works, for thou art the cause of all good things.

*Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—*

O divinely blessed Peter and Febronia, who lived together in peace and piety, entreat Christ, that He grant remission of sins to your servants, who piously celebrate your memorial.

*Theotokion—*

Knowing thee alone to be our hope and boast, O all-holy Theotokos, we who pay thee homage with faith pray: Rejoice, O holy Mary who didst not taste of wedlock, our protection and wall of defense, and the helper of those amid misfortunes! Beseech Christ thy Son in behalf of thy servants; for set our hope on thee.

*On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: "Spec. Mel.: "Called from on high…"—*

Like a sun of brilliant splendor shining forth from the west, ye have enlightened the whole land of Russia and guided it to the light of gladness> And now, O blessed Peter and all-wise Febronia, pray ye earnestly to Christ for those who hymn you, who glorify and ask healings; and have recourse unto Christ, that He save and enlighten our souls.

O great and ineffable wonder of grace divine! How are we able to hymn or speak of the blessed Peter and the all-wise Febronia? The one was brave and pious, and the other was wise and preserved reverence; the one vanquished the prideful serpent, and the other loved humility. And they now pray to Christ God, that He save and enlighten our souls.

The most honored feast of the holy wonderworkers is come, bringing salvation unto all; and, mystically clapping our hands thereon, let us say thus unto them: Rejoice, lamps of the noetic Sun for those in darkness! Rejoice, Peter and thy spouse, who preserved the Orthodox Faith in the Unity of the Holy Trinity, Whom do ye entreat, that our souls be enlightened and saved.

Having first labored for Christ from your youth, O all-lauded ones, and recognized Him in this world, in that ye are all-praised, ye were thus well pleasing unto Him through almsgiving and prayer. Wherefore, even after death ye grant healing and great mercy unto all who honor you with faith, O Peter and Febronia.

*Glory…: Idiomelon, in Tone II—*

Come, all ye nations, clap your hands and join chorus! Come, all ye hierarchs and priests of Russia, ye monks and simple folk, and be glad in spirit on the appointed day of the feast of the new wonderworkers of Murom, the blessed Peter and Febronia the all-wise! And let us honor them with praises and hymns, as with blossoms, saying thus: Rejoice, O all-glorious ones, heavenly ones and earthly angels, abodes of the Holy Spirit, followers of the sayings of the Gospel, through which ye have received the things of incorruption instead of those which are corrupt. And now, on your memorial, beseech Christ God, that He preserve your homeland and have mercy on the city and people who honor you; and that He save our souls.

*Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

All of my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.

*Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.*

**At Liturgy**
{{text_align=center}}

**NOTEABLE ADDITIONS: AUGMENTED LITURGY AND PRAYER AT END OF LITURGY**
{{text_align=center}}

*Augmented Litany Addditions—*

Also on this occasion, to add to the augmented litany of the Divine Liturgy the following petitions:

Again we pray that Thy people would keep this commandment: what God has joined, let not man put asunder, and that He would give their home churches indestructible strength and increase in love unfeigned;

Again we pray for the preservation of the marriages of Thy servants, in peace and concord, piety and purity;

Again we pray that Thy people may rejoice to see sons and daughters, and that our people would multiply and inherit Thy blessing from generation to generation.

*On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III, Canon I of the saints, and 4 from Ode VI, Canon II of the saints.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone VII—*

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213
{{text_align=center}}

Brethren, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

*Alleluia, in Tone VI—*

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 10
{{text_align=center}}

At that time there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you.”

*Communion verse—*

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

*End of Liturgy—*

**Prayer to the Holy Pious Prince Peter and Princess Febronia of Murom**

O ye who have greatly pleased God as all-wondrous miracleworkers, pious Prince Peter and Princess Febronia, intercessors of Murom, protectors of honorable marriage and zealous prayerful intermediaries for all of us to the Lord!

During the days of your lives you showed an example of piety, Christian love and faithfulness to one another even to the grave, and thus you glorified lawful and blessed marriage.

For this we turn to you and we pray with firm zeal: lift up for us sinners, your holy prayers to the Lord our God, and beseech for us all that is good and profitable for our souls and bodies: true faith, good hope, unhypocritical love, unshakeable piety, success in good deeds\*, and, especially, through your prayers grant to those who have been joined in the bond of marriage chastity, love for one another in the bond of peace, oneness of mind and body, a bed undefiled, a blameless life, long-lived seed, the blessing of children, homes filled with all good things, and, in eternal life the unfading crown of Heavenly glory.

Yea, O holy wonder-workers! Disdain not our prayers, which we raise up to you with compunction, but be our eternal intercessors before the Lord and grant unto us through your intercessions to receive eternal salvation and to inherit the Heavenly Kingdom, that we may glorify the inexpressible love for mankind of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, God, worshiped in the Holy Trinity, unto the ages of ages. Amen.

*Translated from the Church Slavonic by the reader Isaac E. Lambertsen. Translation copyright © 2013. All rights reserved.*

