The 7th Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of the Holy Venerable Martyr Macarius, Wonderworker of Kanev

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone II—

Come, let us rejoice in the Lord, celebrating the memory of the venerable martyr Macarius with splendor; for by his words and acts he instructeth us how to live virtuously in Christ, to endure tribulations with trust in the Lord, and not to fear the death of the body, but to be faithful to Christ the Savior until our last breath, that we might receive the crown of life. Through the supplications of the blessed Macarius, O God, have mercy upon us. *Twice*

O holy Macarius who didst love the Lord Jesus surpassingly from thy youth, thou gavest thyself over to spiritual struggles, and wast a helper of the suffering and oppressed. And thou didst valiantly receive a martyr’s death at the hands of the Moslems; wherefore, Christ God hath revealed thee to the faithful as a fervent ally, granting great mercy to the world. *Twice*

What manner of praise shall we offer thee, O holy Macarius, for thou hast been shown to be a fragrant flower of the Church of Christ? For thou didst constantly teach the people the knowledge of the Faith of Christ, leading sinners to repentance, knowing the secrets of man’s heart. Thou didst see things yet to come as though they were in the present, and didst exhort all thy children to endure for the name of Christ. Wherefore, through thy supplications, O blessed one, our Savior granteth the faithful great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, in the same tone—

Thou wast an heir to the kingdom of heaven, O Macarius, for thou didst acquire it by thy struggles, disdaining all the glory of this corrupt world; and having labored for Christ the Savior in word and deed, and not spurned His commandments, thou didst whiten thy garments in the blood of the Lamb Who for our sake of His own will underwent ­suffering, and granteth His faithful servants the crown of life incorruptible.

Now & ever…, idiomelon of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

O Virgin all-holy and pure, we, the multitude of angels in heaven and the human race on earth, bless thy most honored nativity, in that thou didst become the Mother of Christ God, the Creator of all. Cease thou never to entreat Him, we pray, in behalf of us who, after God, have placed our trust in thee, O most lauded Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, adornment of the Orthodox Church, great struggler for piety, luminous star indicating the way unto Christ, fearless defender of the Orthodox Faith, terror of enemies, visible and invisible, warrior of the Savior, invincible in courage! Him do thou beseech, O blessed Macarius, that He grant unto our souls great mercy.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Rejoice, O treasury of divine understanding, great preacher of the never-waning Light, corrector of immorality, who turnest the ungodly to repentance, stern denouncer of those who judge unjustly, who guidest the faithful to struggle for Christ the Savior! Him do thou beseech, O holy Macarius, that He grant great mercy unto those who honor thee.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Rejoice, great model of the monastic life, worthy converser with the angels, thou who bestowest the grace of God upon the faithful, dost direct the erring to salvation, good and meek shepherd of the Orthodox people, zealous physician of ailing souls! O great ascetic, faithful servant of the Physician of souls and bodies, Him do thou entreat, that He send down great mercy upon the faithful.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

How long, O my soul, wilt thou drown amid transgression? How long wilt thou neglect thy salvation? There is but little time! The Judge already standeth at the door! Remember the life of the blessed Macarius, how he shone forth in great virtues and led sinners to repentance; and with tears cry aloud unto Christ the Savior: Through the supplications of the venerable martyr Macarius, O Christ, guide me to the path of salvation!

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, the composition of Germanus, in Tone IV—

Universal joy hath shone forth upon us from the righteous Joachim and Anna, O most lauded Virgin who, in thine exceeding purity, becamest the animate temple of God, and who alone art truly known to be the Theotokos. Through her prayers, O Christ God, send peace upon the world and great mercy upon our souls.

Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV—

Having dedicated thyself wholly to the Lord from thy youth with divine desire, thou wast revealed to thy city as a radiant luminary, teaching all the true Faith and the God-pleasing life, O hieromartyr Macarius, boast of Ovruch. Wherefore, pursued like an innocent lamb by the riotous foe, thou didst go up to the Monastery of Kanev, where as a good shepherd thou didst lay down thy life for thy sheep. And now, hastening with compunction to the most precious shrine of thy much healing relics, O venerable martyr Macarius, we sinners receive the gift of cures; for thou dost ever pour forth health upon the sick, consolation upon the grieving, and dost fulfill the every need of all who honor thee; and thou prayest to Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Mary, the divine Maiden, is born unto us today from the root of Jesse and the loins of David; and all things rejoice and are made new through joy. Rejoice together, O heaven and earth! Praise her, ye lands of the gentiles! Joachim maketh glad, and Anna holdeth festival, crying aloud: A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the Nourisher of our Life!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the forefeast, twice; Glory…, that of the venerable martyr; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast, Once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

O ye Orthodox people, let us hasten today to the shrine of the relics of the venerable martyr, and let us bring to mind the words and acts of this great man, whereby he showed himself to be a beacon of the Orthodox Church and the fervent helper of those who honor his holy memory. Through his supplications, O Christ our Savior, grant Thy peace unto us sinners, for Thou alone lovest mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the sessional hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

Having been born most gloriously from the womb of a barren woman, thou didst give birth from thy virginal womb in manner transcending nature; for, revealed as a beautiful stem, thou didst give rise to the Life of the world. Wherefore, the hosts of heaven cry out to thee, O Theotokos: Glory to thine advent, O pure one! Glory to thy nativity! Glory to thy virginity, O Mother who hast not known wedlock!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

O great and glorious venerable martyr Macarius, invincible defender of the Church of Christ, tireless preacher of the word of God: entreat Christ our God, that at His dread judgment He deliver us from standing at His left hand and from the everlasting torment of Gehenna, O our fervent advocate!

Glory…, Now & ever…: the sessional hymn, of the forefeast in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who is equally without beginning…”—

All those of heaven now rejoice, and the human race now keepeth festival with them. The prophets mystically are glad; for she whom they foresaw in generations of old in images—the bush, the jar and the staff, the cloud, the portal, the throne and the great mountain—is born today.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable martyr Macarius, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be ­multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: That which was mystically commanded…”**—**

When thy glorious suffering was finished and the ungodly Moslems had severed thy head, Christ revealed thy relics to be incorrupt; and kissing them, we cry aloud unto thee: O holy one, by thy supplications save us from the deception of the evil one!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Out of the love of my soul I cry unto thee, O Mistress, thou ray of the all-radiant Sun, portal of salvation, gate of heaven, noetic ladder for all Christians: Accept the entreaty of those who call thee blessed, O hope of our souls, and grant us salvation.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O heir of God who hast a portion with Christ, servant of the Lord, holy Macarius, thy life was in accord with thy name: for thy gray hairs shone forth understanding, the radiance of thy countenance bore witness to the innocence of thy soul, and thy quiet speech proclaimed thy meekness. Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the saints. Pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Canon of the forefeast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable martyr, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the nativity of the divine Virgin Maiden”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Rejoicing today, let us with gladness hymn the divine nativity of the Mother of God; for she hath given birth to the Joy of the universe which destroyeth the grief of our first mother.

From a barren woman doth the all-pure and most immaculate Mistress issue forth barren of sin, whom the law prefigured and the proclamations of the divine heralds of God announced.

The temple and palace of the King didst thou become, wherein, fashioning a habitation for Himself, the Transcendent One maketh of the faithful a dwelling-place of the Holy Trinity.

*Theotokion:* The most comely wedding chamber, the most exalted throne of God, whereon the Transcendent One seated Himself in the flesh, issueth forth from a barren woman; and He raiseth up those who sit in the darkness of perdition to the knowledge of the Light, by His goodness.

Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Through the supplications of Macarius, O Savior, have mercy upon us”, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Beset by many perils, I flee unto thee, O venerable martyr Macarius, seeking consolation of soul. By thine intercession with Christ the Master, do thou help me.

Throughout thy whole life thou didst show thyself to be an angel in the flesh, O Macarius, leading the Orthodox people to salvation, and a great luminary of the Church of Christ. Wherefore, assembling, we the faithful honor thy memory as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Unto thee, O all-pure Mistress who gavest birth to the Author of our salvation, do I flee with tears. Be thou protection for me amid all sorrows and evil circumstances.

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

A fertile land is born of a barren land, bearing as fruit the Husbandman of all good things, the life-bearing Grain Who nourisheth all by His divine gesture.

Today hath the rod of virginity sprouted forth, from whence our God, the Gardener, doth blossom forth as a flower, cutting down the branches of wickedness by His extreme beauty.

Lo! the mountain unquarried, which arose from a barren rock, produceth the noetically quarried Stone, Who crusheth the falsehood of all graven idols.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

The Creator of angels and men gave thee the wisdom to forsake this vain world and struggle in the monastic life, O blessed Macarius. Entreat our Savior, O Macarius, that He grant that we may have steadfast love for Him, and may lead a virtuous life.

Desiring with all thy heart to labor for Christ alone, after the repose of thy parents, O Macarius, thou didst go to the Monastery of Ovruch, and there, guided by the Spirit of God, thou didst make the divine Scriptures thy food. Entreat our Savior, O Macarius, that we sinners may also love them as a divinely inspired wellspring.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the wounds of my soul, O Mistress, for I flee unto thine aid; and beseech thy Son, that He deliver me from perils, for thou didst ineffably give birth to the Deliverer of the world.

Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Today Mary, the Virgin and Theotokos, the boundless chamber of the heavenly Bridegroom, is born! From a barren woman, by the counsel of God, the chariot of the Word is rightly adorned; for she was foretold as the divine portal and Mother of life.

*Ikos:* The divine Maiden Mary, whom once the prophets of God foresaw in the Spirit, hath been given as the fruit of a barren woman. Beholding her today rising up in the womb of Anna, with the faithful Joachim we noetically make haste to the appointed feast, and, standing afar off, cry aloud, saying: The restoration of this world hath now sprouted forth from the womb of the barren woman: the divine portal and Mother of life!

Sessional hymn of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII—

Thou didst bear upon thine own shoulders the Cross of the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world, O Macarius, which the cities of Ovruch and Kanev perceived in thy deeds with their own eyes. Pereaslavl’ by the Dnieper boasteth in thee, for there thy relics poured forth many miracles; and the city of Cherkassa rejoiceth, possessing thy relics at this time. And kissing them with reverence, with sacred hymns we send up praise to Christ God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically ordained…”—

Let heaven rejoice and let the earth be glad! For the heaven of God is born on earth: this divine Bride born of the promise. A barren woman nourisheth the babe Mary, and Joachim rejoiceth in her nativity, saying: “The rod is born to me, from whence Christ, the Flower, is arisen out of the root of David! Truly this is a most glorious wonder!

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The Maiden who is more exalted than the angels is born on earth, in holiness and purity beyond compare; and she giveth birth unto Christ, the purification, sanctification and perfect deliverance of all.

Blessed was the fruit of Anna; for she bore in her womb her who would contain the blessed and infinite Word Who bestoweth regeneration upon all the faithful.

Now doth the gloom of evil begin to break, for the most immaculate one, the animate cloud of the Sun, hath shone forth from a barren womb. Her radiant nativity do we celebrate.

As a fruitful olive-tree sprung forth from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, hath Anna first given birth unto thee who will cause the merciful Word to spring forth. His mercy and truth abide forever.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

O Macarius, thou didst teach the life of the virtues unto the many people who came to thee at thy monastery, to listen to thy discourse and to find consolation for their souls. Comfort us also, O thou who art full of loving-kindness, amid the sorrows and evil circumstances which beset us.

From thy youth concerning thyself solely with pleasing God, and not with any earthly thing, O Macarius, and having received the authority to guide and instruct monks, thou didst zealously teach the word of God not only to them, but to people in the world as well. O father, by thy supplications help us, that we also may seek for the words of the Lord as treasures which cannot be taken away.

*Theotokion:* By thy supplications, O Mistress, heal thou our grievous infirmities of soul and body, for thou art the Mother of all the faithful who trust in thy help and protection.

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Now is the sealed book born, which it is impossible for mortals to read by the nature of the law, and which is kept in the dwelling-place of the Word. For the books of the divinely eloquent have revealed her through the Spirit.

The vine of salvation is born today, which blossometh forth the divine Cluster of incorruption, which poureth forth sweetness; and everyone, drinking mystically thereof, bringeth forth divine and salvific gladness as fruit.

Leap up, O men, joining chorus with the angels! As the Virgin is born today of the barren woman, sadness cometh to an end and is transformed into joy for those who celebrate her divine nativity.

Most manifestly did the prophet describe thee as a new and divine scroll, whereon the Word is written by the finger of the Father, O Virgin, in His goodness inscribing in the Book of Life all who submit to His authority.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Seeking the peace of which our Savior spake unto the apostles, saying: “My peace I leave you; My peace I give unto you”, O Macarius, amid difficult circumstances thou didst quell the anger of the brethren in the Monastery of Ovruch, having received authority, in that thou didst commit thyself to the will of the Lord.

Thou didst give thy divinely wise instruction unto all who came to thee, as it were sweet honey to imbibe, O Macarius; for, following the words of the apostle, thou didst ever teach the people to ponder things above, and not the things of this earth.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, Mother of the Deliverer: give life to our souls, we who have been slain by sin entreat thee, that we may hymn thee who gavest birth to the Life and Resurrection of all.

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Today is born the bridge which leadeth mankind to the Light, the ladder of heaven, the most manifest mountain of God, the Virgin Theotokos, whom we call blessed.

Anna, the shell, hath given rise to the purple which later will dye the fleece of the King’s incarnation. Her do we all hymn as is meet.

A wellspring hath now issued forth from a little drop: the most immaculate one who, having given birth to the Abyss of salvation, causeth the boundless streams of polytheism to cease.

Thou didst spring forth from a barren root, O ever-blessed Virgin Theotokos, and by thy divine budding forth hast severed the thorns of wickedness at the root.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst show thyself to be a most excellent warrior of Christ the Savior, the Vanquisher of hell and death, O Macarius, when the followers of the Latin heresy strove by evil words and deeds to turn thee from the right path; but the Savior of all helped thee, and thou didst prevail over all their wiles.

A multitude of Moslems desired to destroy the city of Ovruch and its monastery, O holy Macarius; yet thou didst save the city from its enemies, not by sword, or spear, or cauldrons of fiery pitch, but by thy prayer unto the Lord

*Theotokion:* Rouse me from the dark sleep of sin by thy mediation before thy Son, O Mistress, that He may teach me ever to follow His divine words.

Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone II—

Thou didst illumine thine angelic life of fasting with ascetic struggles, and wast shown to be a converser with the angels, O divinely blessed Macarius. With them cease thou never to pray to Christ God in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Rejecting the corruptible glory of this world, thou didst desire to please Christ alone thy whole life, O blessed Macarius; wherefore, nurturing thy soul with constant labors, fasting and prayer to the Savior, thou wast not afraid of bodily sufferings and death, as thou didst show when the ungodly Moslems destroyed the city of Kanev and subjected thee to tortures and beheading; for thou didst not think about this corrupt world, but didst ever set thy mind upon that which is above, O Macarius, for thou didst strive to be a friend to both angels and men. With them do thou unceasingly pray for us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Blessed are Joachim and Anna, who manifestly gave birth to the blessed and pure Mother of God who gave birth to the blessed Word Who maketh all the faithful blessed.

As a precious gift did thy parents acquire thee who conceived God, Who hath enriched with better gifts those who cry out: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

More blessed than wine are thy breasts, O divinely called Anna; for with sacred breasts thou didst nurture with milk her who gave suck to the all-blessed Word, the Bestower of milk, the Nourisher of all things that breathe.

O divinely inspired David, leap up, strike thy psaltery and dance! For, lo! the ark which of old thou didst proclaim cometh forth from a barren womb, reserved for the King and God of creation.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Looking to the loving-kindness and help of the Lord and Savior, O Macarius, when the Moslems razed the Monastery of Ovruch thou didst depart to struggle in the Lavra of the Caves of Kiev. And praising thy boldness, we cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

When thou wast the abbot of the monastery in the city of Kanev, O Macarius, as when thou wast in Ovruch thou didst teach both monks and layfolk to live in accordance with the commandments of God, unceasingly caring for men’s souls, that the God of our fathers might be blessed.

The slothful and immoral son of a pious woman thou didst diligently strive to teach how to pray to the Lord; and thine efforts set the negligent one aright and turned him to the Lord, to Whom all of us, the faithful, cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Mother, entreat Him Who broke asunder the bonds of death and hell by His sufferings, death and resurrection, and hath saved the human race from everlasting condemnation, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto all.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Let us give movement to our tongue in hymnody, honoring the divine nativity of her who, through the Spirit, made incarnate the all-divine Word; and let us cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Leap up, ye prophets of God, honoring the nativity of the Virgin; for she hath fulfilled the prophecy of all of you, giving birth to Christ, the God of all, Who is foretold by you. Him do ye exalt supremely for all ages!

Ye mountains, resound with gladness! O apostles and martyrs, join chorus! Ye venerable and righteous, rejoicing today in the nativity of the Mother of the Lord, cry out: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The most pure Mother of the Word hath blossomed forth as a fragrant apple; she hath appeared as a divine rose, perfumed the ends of the world today and banished the fœtor of our sin. Her do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Human nature, bereft of the precious gifts of the divine Spirit, was made glad on this day, seeing the divine Maiden born of a barren woman; and it cried out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

By the secret sending of money and a written admonition to the judge of the city, O divinely wise Macarius, thou didst correct the bribe-taker who was rendering unjust judgments for the people; for in thy mind, O blessed one, thou didst behold the Judge of the living and the dead, Who knoweth the deeds and thoughts of men. Him do we, the faithful, hymn and exalt supremely for all ages.

By the permission of God it was given thee, because of thy piety, O blessed Macarius, to foresee the incursion of enemies against the city of Kanev, and to disclose this to the faithful, that, without growing despondent, they might be found to be vigilant when our Savior sent a trial down upon them. Him do we hymn and exalt supremely for all ages.

*Triadicon:* O Trinity in three Hypostases, deliver us from the grievous passions whereby we sinners are beset, and help us to do good works in our lifetime, that we may obtain eternal salvation.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress and Mother of the Deliverer, hearken unto us who entreat thee and beg thy help and assistance. Beseech thy Son, Christ our God, that He forgive us our transgressions and deliver us from eternal condemnation and torment, and that He have mercy upon us on the day of judgment.

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Lo! the holy place of God hath been shown forth! The all-glorious city of the King hath been erected! The luminous garden of paradise hath splendidly blossomed forth her who is the mediatress of paradise, the point of reconciliation between God and man.

Today hath the lamp of the Light appeared, in which the preëternal golden Light, having taken up His abode, illumineth those who languish in the night of evils, destroyeth the gloom of ungodliness, and truly causeth all to share in the day, because of their faith.

Today the earth joineth in chorus, for it hath seen the new and most comely heaven of God born. And dwelling therein in the flesh, He raiseth men up higher than the heavens and deifieth all in His goodness. Chanting, we magnify Him with faith.

Joachim and Anna, the all-comely pair, have given rise to the unblemished heifer. And the fatted Calf Who came forth from her was slain for the world, taking upon Himself the transgressions of men and destroying the sacrifices offered to the demons.

O Theotokos who gavest birth to the Light, illumine us who in the Spirit celebrate thy radiant nativity, and show us to have a share of the light which is to come; and by thy maternal supplications, O all-pure one, grant us peace and deliverance from evils.

Canon of the Venerable Martyr

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

The multifarious enemies were able to break down the gates of the Monastery of Kanev, yet they were unable to break thy courage, O Macarius, when they beheld thee standing before the gates, clad in a hair-shirt, with the Cross in thy hand and on thy breast. Entreat the Savior in our behalf, O holy one, that He drive away from us the spirit of the fear of sufferings and bodily death.

Thou wast mocked and subjected to ill treatment, O Macarius, by the ungodly Moslems who, having beaten and lacerated thy body, cut off thy head; yet thou hast appeared in heaven, adorned with glory and honor. Pray thou, O Macarius, that our Savior deprive not us sinners of His heavenly kingdom.

All throughout thy life thou didst follow Christ God, Who broke the gates and bars of hell, O venerable martyr Macarius; wherefore, thou wast not afraid to receive death at the hands of the enemy, for thou didst fearlessly say unto them: “My treasure is in the heavens!”, where thou dwellest with the host on high, O blessed one.

Thou hast been shown to be a radiant beacon for the whole world, O Macarius, for even during thy lifetime on earth multifarious healings were worked for the sick through thy supplications; and we likewise behold them now, pouring forth from thy holy relics, unto the glory of Christ the Savior, Whose good and faithful servant thou wast shown to be.

*Theotokion:* As many as hasten to thine aid, O Mistress, never depart ashamed; for thou art shown to be the hope of all the ends of the earth, as the Mother of the Deliverer of our souls, Who in His loving-kindness came down to men on earth.

Exapostilarion—

Let us praise the venerable martyr Macarius, the struggler of great faith and piety, for by preaching the word of God he saved many from everlasting death, and as a good warrior of Christ he endured ill treatment, following the words of the apostle, and showeth the faithful the way to the kingdom of heaven.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the forefeast—

Be renewed, O Adam, and be thou magnified, O Eve! Ye prophets, join chorus with the apostles and the righteous! For the common joy of angels and men hath shone forth today from the righteous Joachim and Anna: Mary the Theotokos.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV—

Be glad, ye Orthodox people! Hold festival, ye who love Sion! For, lo! Christ the Savior hath glorified Macarius of Pereaslavl’, the earthly angel and heavenly man, and hath revealed him to all as a fervent advocate for men, who healeth ailments of soul and body among the people.

Thou wast shown to be a zealous champion of the Orthodox Faith on earth, O Macarius, and wast not afraid of the wiles of the enemy, for thou didst ever behold before thine eyes the Lord Almighty Who hath dominion over the living and the dead, and Who ever leadeth His good and faithful servants into His joy.

Thou wast shown to be a wise husbandman of the vineyard of Christ, O Macarius, teaching the virtuous life to monks and layfolk, leading sinners to repentance by thy reproof, ever abiding on high in thy thoughts; and after thy departure from the earth thou wast accounted worthy of the kingdom of heaven, having endured voluntary suffering for Christ, O divinely blessed one.

After thine earthly life thou didst attain everlasting joy, O Macarius, for in thy life thou didst walk the straight path through the narrow gate, considering the glory of the corruptible world to be as nought; and thou didst lay down thy life for Christ the Lord, Who bestowed upon thee a crown of incorruption, and imparteth healings of infirmities of soul and body through thy precious relics.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O Lord, when thou didst abide with men on earth, thou didst teach them not to lay up earthly treasures for themselves, for such are subject to corruption and theft, whereas the treasures of heaven cannot be stolen. And following Thy words in his life, Macarius of Pereaslavl’ said unto the godless Moslems: “My treasure is not on earth, but in heaven!” Through the supplications of Thy venerable martyr, O Christ, vouchsafe unto Thy servants the kingdom of heaven.

Now & ever…, idiomelon of the forefeast, in Tone II—

The Queen of all, the dwelling-place of God foretold of old, the divine habitation of the ever-existent Essence, hath come forth today from the barren womb of the glorious Anna. Because of her hades hath been trampled underfoot, and Eve, the mother of us all, is led into steadfast life. Let us cry out to her as is meet: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the forefeast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the venerable martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \[II Tim. 2: 1-9\]

Timothy my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please Him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elects’ sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 38

\[Mt. 10: 32-38\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man’s foes shall be those of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

