Saturday before the Exaltation of the Cross

\(which may fall as early as 7 September\)

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone III—

O chant unto our God, chant ye; chant unto our King, chant ye.

*Stichos:* Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of rejoicing.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 126

\[I Cor. 2: 6-9\]

Brethren: We speak wisdom among those who are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, who come to nought: but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory: which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But as it is written: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for those who love Him.

Alleluia, in Tone V—

*Stichos:* Of Thy mercies, O Lord, will I sing forever. Unto generation and generation will I declare Thy truth with my mouth.

*Stichos:* for Thou hast said: Mercy shall be built up forever. In the heavens shall Thy truth be established.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 39

\[Mt. 10: 37-11: 1\]

The Lord said: “He who loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he who loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he who taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me. He who findeth his life shall lose it: and he who loseth his life for My sake shall find it. He who receiveth you receiveth Me, and he who receiveth Me receiveth Him Who sent Me. He who receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he who receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.” And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding His twelve disciples, He departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.

The epistle and Gospel scheduled for this Saturday are also read, as is any prescribed for the saint of the day.

Communion hymn of Saturday.

N.B.: If the Leave-taking of the Nativity of the Mother of God coincide with the Saturday before the Exaltation of the Cross, the prokimenon, alleluia verses and communion verse are those of the feast. Epistle and Gospel of the Saturday before the Exaltation of the Cross precede those of the feast. Prokimenon and Alleluia of the Saturday before the Exaltation are not chanted.

Sunday before the Exaltation of the Cross

\(which may fall as early as 8 September\)

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VI—

O Lord, save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance.

*Stichos:* Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my god, be not silent unto me.

Epistle to the Galatians, § 215 \[Gal. 6: 14-18\]

Brethren: God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.

Alleluia, in tone I—

*Stichos:* I have raised up one chosen out of My people; with My holy oil have I anointed him.

*Stichos:* For My hand shall be unto Him an ally, and Mine arm shall strengthen him.

Gospel according to John, §9 \[Jn. 3: 13-17\]

The Lord said: “No man hath ascended up to heaven, but He Who came down from heaven, even the Son of man Who is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through Him might be saved.”

The scheduled readings follow.

Communion verse of Sunday.

