The 10th Day of the Month of September

Afterfeast of the Nativity of Our Most Holy Lady the Theotokos

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs Menodora,

Metrodora and Nymphodora

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” six stichera; three of the afterfeast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O all-glorious wonder...”—

O all-glorious wonder! For the Mother of God who tasted not of wedlock today springeth forth as a rod bearing a Flower, from a childless and barren womb, from the righteous Joachim and Anna! Wherefore, the councils of the prophets and the whole assembly of the patriarchs rejoice at her nativity.

Today David rejoiceth, Jesse danceth, Levi is magnified, and the righteous Joachim leapeth up in spirit; the barrenness of Anna is manifestly loosed by thy nativity, O pure Mary. O thou who tasted not of wedlock, the company of angels and all mortals call thy divine womb blessed!

Rejoice, O union of the earthly! Rejoice, temple of the Lord! Rejoice, unwedded Mother, who hast most gloriously loosed the barrenness of Anna and by thy nativity hast poured forth remission of sins upon mortals! Rejoice, O all-immaculate one! Rejoice, divine temple! Rejoice, O tabernacle, wherein our Creator and Lord made His abode!

And three stichera of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

Having adorned yourselves with vesture empurpled with your blood, O virgin maidens, in your beauty ye united yourselves incorporeally unto Christ our comely God Who preserveth your virginity undefiled in the immortal bridal chamber of incorruption, in the mansions of heaven, in a chamber not made by hands, O martyrs.

In imperfect bodies, yet with a perfect mind, ye vanquished the ancient serpent, the author of evil, with the power of the Spirit, O glorious ones, and showed his might to be feeble. Wherefore, ye have received crowns of victory, O Menodora, Metrodora and Nymphodora, ye champions of the Trinity.

Your members dislocated, fed to the fire, lacerated with iron claws, hanged upon a tree and beheaded by the sword, ye did not deny Christ, O all-praised athletes. Wherefore, ye have received the crown of victory, O Menodora, Metrodora and Nymphodora, ye champions of the Trinity.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone II—

What is this noise of revelers? Joachim and Anna keep festival mystically, saying: “Rejoice with us today, O Adam and Eve!” For by their transgression was paradise shut, but a right glorious fruit is now given unto us: Mary, the divine Maiden, who throweth open its gates unto all.

At the Aposticha, these stichera of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

Let the gate of the God-receiving temple be opened, taking in today with glory the temple and throne of the King which Joachim bringeth, consecrating her to the Lord: her who was taken from him to be the Mother of God.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

Noetic rays of universal joy have shone forth upon the world, proclaiming beforehand unto all Christ God, the Sun of glory, in thy nativity, O all-pure one; for thou hast been shown to be the mediatress of true gladness and grace.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

This thy most precious glory, O pure one, proclaimeth beforehand to all men thy kindhearted beneficence; for thou art the mediatress of our present joy, for by thy supplication thou hast been revealed to us as the cause of joy to come, O pure one.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Idiomelon, in Tone II—

The Queen of all who hath been foretold, the habitation of God, the divine dwelling place of the eternal Essence, hath come forth today from the barren womb of the glorious Anna, and by her shameless hades hath been trampled down, and Eve, the mother of our race, is led into everlasting life. To her do we cry out, as is meet: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb!

Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, hath proclaimed joy to all the world; for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who, having annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, and having abolished death, hath granted us life everlasting.

At Matins

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before...”—

Be thou magnified, O Judah, and let David be glad! Be thou renewed, O Adam, and let Levi be strengthened! For Christ hath been born to me through them. Strike thy harp, O psalmist, and tell who this is who hath been born, whom thou callest daughter. She is the nurturer of our life, the Mother of Christ God.

Glory..., Now and ever..., and the above is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “That which was mystically commanded...”—

Be thou renewed, O Adam! Rejoice, O Eve! Make merry, O David! Be of good cheer, O Anna, for the Mother of thy Creator is born most gloriously! All the earth joineth chorus, renewed, and rejoiceth, clad in vesture of gladness. Let every tongue now cry out to thee, O Mary, in chorus: Blessed is the house of David, for it nurtureth her who nourisheth our Life!

Glory..., Now and ever..., and the above is repeated.

The second canon of the Nativity of Our Most Holy Lady, with eight troparia, including its irmos; and that of the holy martyrs, with four troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* To Him Who crushed battles with His arm and led Israel across the Red Sea, let us chant, as to God our Deliverer, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

She who is holy among the saints is placed in the holy sanctuary as a babe, to be fed by the hands of angels. Let us all, therefore, faithfully keep festival together on her nativity.

Let all creation join chorus, and let David be glad, for from his tribe and seed hath come forth as a flower the rod which beareth the Lord, the Creator of all.

Anna was barren and unable to give birth, yet she was not childless in God’s eyes; for, lo! she hath become known by all generations as the mother of the pure Virgin, from whom the Creator of nature hath sprung forth in the guise of a servant.

With hymns we all honor thee, the innocent ewe-lamb who hast been born of Anna and who through thy womb brought the Lamb Christ into our nature.

*Triadicon:* I glorify the three Unoriginate Ones, I hymn the three Holy Ones, I proclaim the three equally Everlasting Ones to be of a single Essence; for the one God is glorified in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Who hath seen a Babe fed with milk Whom a father hath now sown? Or where hath there been seen a Mother who is a Virgin? Truly past understanding are both of these things, O pure Theotokos.

Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is:

“I honor the fervent sufferings of the three sisters,”

the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O glorious martyrs, make supplication to the uncreated Trinity Whom ye preached, for us who now honor your divine sufferings and corrections, O divinely blessed ones.

Protected by the divine weaponry of faith, the maidens scorned the words of the tyrant, and for the sake of the Life of all they submitted to the threefold waves of torments and to an unjust death.

Strengthened by the omnipotent power of the Creator, the most honored ones assumed a manly character; with their feet they trampled upon the twisted and prideful serpent and cast him down to the ground.

*Theotokion:* With hymns we honor the pure Mary as an animate temple, an incorrupt tabernacle, the portal of heaven, the divine table, the palace and throne of the Master.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord; my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies. I am glad in Thy salvation.

O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, thou hast been shown to be higher than all creation, having given birth in the flesh to the Creator.

Raised in the Holy of Holies, O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, thou wast shown to be more exalted than creation, having given birth in the flesh unto the Creator.

Blessed is thy womb, O chaste Anna, for thou didst pour forth the fruit of virginity who gave birth without seed to Jesus the Deliverer, the Nurturer of creation.

O Ever-virgin, all creation calleth thee blessed who hast been born today of Anna as the rod sprung forth from the root of Jesse, who put forth Christ as an all-pure Bloom.

Showing thee to be more exalted than all creation, O pure Theotokos, thy Son magnifieth thy birth from Anna and gladdeneth all today.

*Triadicon:* We worship Thee, O Father unoriginate in essence, we hymn Thy timeless Son, and we honor Thy Spirit Who is equally everlasting: as God three in Hypostases but one in Essence.

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, who gavest birth unto the Bestower of light, the Author of man’s life, thou hast been shown to be the treasure of our life and the portal of Light unapproachable.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Wounding thee cruelly, the all-iniquitous tormentor of our life, dead of mind, sought to force thee to renounce Christ, O martyr Menodora.

The tyrant took no pity on thee who lifted thine eyes to God, O martyr, but with an iron rod broke thy members without mercy, thus weaving for thee an everlasting crown which will not wither away.

By your torments ye acquired treasure in the heavens and everlasting glory, O thrice-rich holy martyrs, and ye have clearly drawn nigh unto God.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin who hast appeared, drive the darkness from my soul, burst the bonds of sin, and save me, O thou who gavest birth unto the most Compassionate One.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

Clad as sisters in the Spirit, ye who contended with endurance for the Trinity have vanquished the greatly cunning enemy; wherefore, ye have made your abode with the five virgins in the heavenly bridal chamber, O passion-bearers, and with the angels ye stand in unceasing gladness before the King of all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph marvelled...”—

The heavenly choirs of the incorporeal hosts marvelled at your great patience; for, stripped naked, your members broken, enduring a bitter death, ye withstood all as though it were others suffering, thus crushing the apostate serpent with your women’s bodies, O virgin brides of the Bestower of life, champions of the Faith.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Sessional hymn of the Feast of Our Lady, in the same tone—

Today is Mary, the divine Maiden, born for us of the root of Jesse and the loins of David. All things rejoice with joy and are renewed. Rejoice together, O heaven and earth! Praise her, ye people of our native land! Joachim maketh merry, and Anna keepeth festival, crying aloud: A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nourisher of our Life!

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming, O Lord; wherefore he cried aloud: “God shall come out of Thæman!” Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

The Patriarch Jacob, clearly foreseeing the mighty works of Thy dispensation, O Savior, cried out in the Spirit, saying mystically to Judah: “From the tender plant thou art gone up, O my Son!”, referring to Thee, O God, Who wast born of the Virgin.

Now the pure Virgin, the rod of Aaron which sprung forth from the root of David, cometh forth from Anna, and heaven and earth and all the nations of the gentiles mystically join chorus together with Anna and Joachim.

Let heaven now be glad; let the earth rejoice! And let Joachim and David join chorus: the one as the father of thee who truly gavest birth to God, and the other as thine ancestor who proclaimed thy mighty deeds, O pure one.

The whole world rejoiceth with thee today, O divinely wise Anna; for thou hast budded forth the Mother of its Deliverer, she who from the root of David put forth for us the rod of strength which beareth Christ as a flower.

*Triadicon:* I glorify God, the unoriginate Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the consubstantial, uncreated Trinity, before Whom the seraphim stand with reverence, crying aloud: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* The all-unoriginate Origin receiveth a beginning from thee in the flesh and in time, O Theotokos, and He remaineth equally the unoriginate and incarnate Word of the Father, equally everlasting with the Spirit, maintaining His divine dignity.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Resplendent in the rays of the Cross, O ever-blessed Metrodora, bound to a tree thou didst endure torture by fire, quenching the burning coal of deception with the dew of the love of Christ.

Stretching forth thy thought towards the visions manifested to thee, and beholding thy Bridegroom of unimaginable comeliness, O ever-blessed Metrodora, beaten with iron rods thou didst valiantly endure the pangs of torture.

Ye have adorned yourselves and been radiantly glorified, O virgins, loving the all-glorious Word wholly: for, wounded by His love, ye steadfastly endured the assaults of suffering.

*Theotokion:* Enliven me who have been slain by the malice of the deceiver, O all-immaculate one who gavest birth unto Life, for to thee have I fled; and as thou art merciful, O all-immaculate one, raise me up who have fallen into the abyss of sin.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Grant us peace, O Lord our God. O Lord our God, take us for Thy possession. O Lord, we know none other than Thee; we call upon Thy name.

Thy nativity is all-pure, O immaculate Virgin, thy conception is ineffable, and thy birthgiving unutterable, O Bride unwedded; for God hath clad Himself in all of me.

Let the angelic ranks be glad; let the descendants of Adam join chorus; for the rod hath been born which put forth as flower Christ alone, our Deliverer.

Today the condemnation of Eve is lifted in thy nativity, the barrenness of Anna is loosed, and Adam is freed from the ancient curse; for by thee have we been delivered from corruption.

Glory to Thee Who hast glorified the barren woman today! For, according to the promise, she gave birth unto the flowering rod from whence Christ, the Flower of our life, hath budded forth.

*Triadicon:* Glory to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God! Glory to Thee, O timeless and only-begotten Son! Glory to Thee, O Spirit divine and equally enthroned, Who proceedest from the Father and restest in the Son!

*Theotokion:* Thy womb becameth the chariot of the Sun; thy purity remained intact as before, O Virgin; for Christ the Sun appeared from thee like a Bridegroom from a bridal chamber.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Showing forth a steadfast demeanor and insuperable intent before the tribunal, the martyrs plaited a crown of victory for themselves.

Suspended aloft, Nymphodora, who loveth the immortal Bridegroom, now mightily endureth laceration with iron claws.

With hymns let the divinely wise virgins be praised, the thrice-radiant lamps, the house of three chambers, the habitations of the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Acquiring thee alone as elect, comely and immaculate, the all-divine Word is incarnate of thee, O divinely joyous one.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Like the waters of the sea am I tossed about by the waves of life, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, like Jonah I cry to Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord!

Thy chaste parents placed thee, who art the Holy of holies, in the temple of the Lord, O pure one, to be raised with honor and prepared to become His Mother.

Join chorus, ye barren women and mothers! Be of good cheer and leap up, O ye childless! For a childless and barren woman buddeth forth the Theotokos who delivereth Eve from her birth pangs and Adam from the curse.

I hearken to David who singeth to thee: “The virgins that follow after thee shall be brought into the temple of the King.” And with him I also hymn thee, the daughter of the King.

We hymn thy holy nativity and honor thine immaculate conception, O divinely chosen Bride and Virgin. And with us the ranks of angels and the souls of the saints glorify thee.

*Triadicon:* In thee, O pure one, is the mystery of the Trinity hymned and glorified; for the Father was well pleased, and the Word made His abode within thee, and the divine Spirit overshadowed thee.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast a golden candlestick, O pure Theotokos, for in thy womb the Fire made His abode: the Word from the Holy Spirit; and He became visible in thee in human form.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Desiring to behold Thine inconceivable beauty, O unoriginate Word, they who are wounded with Thy love most sweet valiantly endured the cruelty of tortures.

The all-glorious maidens blossomed like lilies in a garden, and by the grace of the Spirit have perfumed the Church with the fragrance of their divers torments.

Desiring the immortal Bridegroom alone, the virgin maidens manifestly vanquished visible death, strengthened by invisible power.

*Theotokion:* The holy Lord Who dwelt in thy womb found thee to be more holy and pure than all creation, O Mother of God lordly of name, O all-pure Mistress.

Kontakion of the Feast of Our Lady, in Tone IV—

In thy holy nativity, O all-pure one, Joachim and Anna are freed from the reproach of childlessness, and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. And, delivered from the affliction of sin, thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nourisher of our Life!

*Ikos:* The supplication of Joachim over his childlessness, together with the sighing of Anna over her barrenness, were right acceptable to God: they entered the ears of the Lord and brought forth life-bearing fruit for the world. For the one made supplication on the mountain, and the other bore her reproach in the garden; and with joy the barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nourisher of our Life.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Chaldæan furnace, burning with fire, was bedewed by the Spirit through the presence of God; and the children chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

We celebrate and bow down with faith before thy holy nativity, O pure one, honoring thy Son, by Whom we have now been delivered from the ancient condemnation of Adam.

Now Anna maketh merry and, rendering praise, crieth out: Though barren, I have given birth unto the Mother of God, for whose sake the condemnation of Eve, to give birth in pain and grief, hath been loosed!

Adam hath been freed and Eve danceth; and they cry out to thee in spirit, O Theotokos: Through thee have we been delivered from the primeval curse with the appearance of Christ!

O the womb which contained the dwelling-place of God! O the womb which bore her who is more spacious than the heavens, the holy throne, the noetic ark of sanctification!

*Triadicon:* We glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit in the unity of the Godhead, the all-holy Trinity, indivisible, uncreated, equally everlasting and consubstantial.

*Theotokion:* Most gloriously didst thou alone give birth unto God, O Virgin. By thy nativity thou hast renewed nature, O Mary. Thou hast released Eve from the primeval curse, O pure Theotokos.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ye spat upon the impious tyrant who commanded you to offer sacrifice to deaf idols, O maidens, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Illumined in mind with divine rays, O most laudable ones, ye darkened the gloom of the idols, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Neither the severing of their limbs, nor persecution, nor tribulation were in any wise able to separate Christ from the martyrs, who cried out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature, thou, O Virgin, wast vouchsafed to give birth through thy womb to the Creator Who fashioneth mortals who chant with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Thou Who coverest Thy chambers with waters and settest the sands as a bound for the sea: Thee doth the sun hymn; Thee doth the moon glorify; and unto Thee doth all creation offer a hymn forever, as to the Creator of all.

Thou, O holy God, Who wrought most glorious things through the barren womb, Who opened the childless womb of Anna and gave her fruit, Thou, O Son of the Virgin, hast received flesh from her, the ever-flourishing Virgin and Theotokos.

Thou, O Lord, Who closest the abyss and openest it, Who raisest water to the clouds and givest the rain, hast given the holy Anna to bud forth and give birth unto the all-pure fruit, the Theotokos, out of a barren root.

O Cultivator of our thoughts, Planter of our souls, Who hast shown forth barren earth as right fruitful, Thou hast made the holy Anna, a field which before was dry, to become burgeoning, right fertile and fruitful, giving rise to the Theotokos, the all-pure fruit.

Come ye all, let us gaze upon the city of God born as from a little chamber, which issueth forth from the gate of Anna’s womb, yet hath no knowledge of the entry, for the one God and Creator issued forth by this strange path.

*Triadicon:* O transcendent Trinity, unoriginate Unity, the multitude of angels hymneth and trembleth before Thee; heaven and earth are in awe of Thee; men bless Thee, and fire serveth Thee as a slave. Everything in creation submitteth to Thee with fear, O holy Trinity.

*Theotokion:* O report most new! God becometh the Son of a woman! O seedless birthgiving! A Mother without a husband, a begotten God! O awesome sight! O, the strange conception of the Virgin! O ineffable nativity, truly past all understanding and contemplation!

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Honed by the love of the Creator, ye dulled the stings of the serpents, having taken up manly struggles in your female bodies; and ye have been crowned with heavenly wreaths.

Struggling together in the midst of the contest, the divinely wise maidens vanquished invisible and incorporeal foes with their flesh, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Strengthened by God the Savior, made powerful by Christ Jesus, ye destroyed the feeble might of the enemy, chanting: Bless the Lord, every work of the Lord!

Covered with the embroidery of the wounds of your torments and adorned with comeliness, O right wondrous maidens, ye have received the kingdom on high, reigning with Christ Jesus.

*Theotokion:* As the undefiled dwelling place of God, thou didst receive Him incarnate, known in two natures, O Maiden. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Foreign to mothers is virginity, and strange is childbirth to virgins; yet both were accomplished in thee, O Theotokos. Wherefore, all of us, the peoples of the world, magnify thee unceasingly.

Thou hast received a nativity worthy of thy purity, O Mother of God; for, according to the promise, thou wast given to the barren one as a fruit springing forth divinely. Wherefore, all of us, the peoples of the earth, unceasingly magnify thee.

Fulfilled is the prophecy of him whom crieth, for he saith: I shall raise up the tabernacle of sacred David which is fallen, which was a foretype of thee, O pure one, through whom the dust of all men hath been fashioned into a body for God.

We venerate thy swaddling clothes, O Theotokos. We glorify Him Who gave fruit to her who before was barren, and Who most gloriously opened the womb of her who was unable to give birth. For as God with complete authority, He doeth all things soever He desireth.

To thee, O Theotokos who wast born of Anna, do we faithfully offer up hymnody as a gift, mothers and virgins glorifying thee as the only Mother and Virgin; and we bow down before thee and hymn and glorify thee.

*Triadicon:* Strange is it for the iniquitous to glorify the unoriginate Trinity: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated omnipotent Principle, by Whom the whole world is sustained by the hand of His might.

*Theotokion:* Within thy womb, O Mother, thou didst contain One of the Trinity: Christ the King, Whom all creation doth hymn and before Whom the ranks of heaven tremble. Him do thou entreat, O most pure one, that our souls be saved.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Desiring to see the beauty of the Bridegroom, O God-bearers, as the ultimate gesture to Him ye received immortality in your mortal bodies. Wherefore, ye are worthily called blessed.

O unblemished ewe-lambs, ye found yourselves among tormentors as among savage wolves; and overcoming their bestiality, ye offered yourselves to Christ as a right acceptable sacrifice.

A wreath of divine glory which fadeth not away have ye woven together, O virgins, and as martyrs ye have been vouchsafed to receive the truly unshakable kingdom with the martyrs.

O honored virgins, as ye have boldness before the Master, pray ye that those who keep your memory with love receive the glory of which ye have been counted worthy and the exultation ye have received.

*Theotokion:* Take pity on me, O Christ, when Thou wilt come to judge the world with glory. Dispel the gloom of my passions, through the prayers of her that gaveth birth to Thee and of Thine honored martyrs, in that Thou art good and greatly merciful.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “O Light immutable...”—

She from whom the noetic Sun hath come forth in the flesh, hath illumined the world today, shining forth from the womb of a barren woman. Wherefore, leaping up, we cry out: Rejoice, O Mary, thou deliverance of our forefathers!

Glory..., Now and ever..., and the above is repeated.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephratha...”—

The only Theotokos, the dwelling place of God, cometh forth from a barren and childless mother; and Adam, restored, rejoiceth.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

Today is joy born of Anna, heralding to the world the abolition of the curse. Rejoice ye all!

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Rejoice, O Joachim and divinely wise Anna, for she hath given birth to the joy and gladness of the world and the mediatress of salvation.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone IV—

The joy of the whole world hath shone forth upon us from the righteous Joachim and Anna: the most laudable Virgin who, because of her surpassing purity, becometh the animate temple of God and is known as the one true Theotokos. Through her prayers, O Christ God, send down peace upon the world and great mercy upon our souls.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia, from Odes IV and V of the canons of the feast.

