The 12th Day of the Month of September

Leave-taking of the Nativity of the All-holy Theotokos

All hymns are taken from the feast itself.

At Vespers

The usual kathisma from the Psalter. On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. \(But if it be Friday evening: Glory…, of the feast; Now & ever…: Dogmaticon of the current tone.\) Prokimenon of the day. No Entrance or Readings. Then, “Vouchsafe, O Lord…”, and the Litany: “Let us complete our evening prayer…” At the Aposticha, the festal stichera; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. After “Our Father…”, the troparion of the feast. Litany, and Dismissal.

At Compline

Kontakion of the feast.

At Nocturns

Nocturns is chanted as usual, with its kathisma. We read use ordinary troparia, not that of the feast. We do read the prayer: “Remember, O Lord…”

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, *twice*; “Glory…; Now & ever…”, the troparion, *once*. After the kathismata, the sessional hymns of the feast. Psalm 50. The Canons of the feast: Canon I, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and Canon II, with 6 troparia. The irmos of each canon is chanted *twice*. *Katavasia:* the irmoi of the Exaltation of the Cross. After Ode III, sessional hymn of the feast, *twice*. After Ode VI, the kontakion and ikos of the feast. At Ode IX, we do not chant the Magnificat, but instead chant the festal refrains. At the katavasia we chant both irmoi with their festal refrains. Festal exapostilarion, *twice*. On the Praises, 4 stichera of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. Great Doxology. After “Our Father”, the festal troparion, *once*. Litanies. Dismissal.

At the Hours

Troparion and kontakion of the feast.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Ode IX: 4 from Canon I and 4 from Canon II.

After the Little Entrance, the troparion and kontakion of the feast.

Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Verse of the feast.

Epistle and Gospel of the day and of the feast.

N.B.: If the Leave-taking of the Nativity of the Theotokos fall on a Sunday:

On Saturday evening

at Little Vespers:

On “Lord, I have cried…”, the resurrectional stichera as usual. At the Aposticha, one sticheron of the resurrection, and the festal aposticha stichera from Great Vespers, with their stichoi; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. Troparion of the resurrection; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast.

At Great Vespers

After the usual kathisma, on “Lord, I have cried…”, 10 stichera: 4 of the resurrection, and 6 of the feast; Glory…, of the feast; Now & ever…, Dogmaticon of the current tone. At Litia, the stichera and doxasticon of the feast. At the Aposticha, the stichera of the resurrection; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast.

At the blessing of the loaves, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, *twice*; and the festal troparion, *once*.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the resurrectional troparion, *twice*; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. After the kathismata, the sessional hymns of the resurrection, and their theotokia. “Blessed art Thou, O Lord… The council of the angels was amazed…”, and the hypacoi of the tone. Hymns of ascent and prokimenon of the tone of the week. “Let every breath…” Gospel of the resurrection. “Having beheld the resurrection of Christ…” Psalm 50 and the rest as usual. Canons: Resurrection, with 4 troparia; Theotokos, with 2 troparia; and both festal canons, with 8 troparia. *Katavasia:* the irmoi of the Exaltation of the Cross. After Ode III, the kontakion and ikos of the feast; sessional hymn of the feast, *twice*. After Ode VI, the resurrectional kontakion and ikos. At Ode IX, we chant the Magnificat. Resurrectional exapostilarion; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. On the Praises, 8 stichera: 4 of the resurrection, and 4 of the feast, including the doxasticon, with the festal stichoi; Glory…, the evangelical sticheron; Now & ever… “All-blessed art thou,…” Great Doxology. After “Our Father”, the matins resurrectional troparion only. Litanies and Dismissal. First Hour and final Dismissal.

On the Hours

Troparia of the resurrection and the feast at each Hour. After “Our Father”, we alternate the festal and resurrectional kontakia.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 10 troparia: 6 of the resurrection, and 4 from Ode IX of the festal canons.

After the Little Entrance: Troparia of the resurrection and the feast; Glory…, kontakion of the resurrection; Now & ever…, kontakion of the feast.

Prokimenon, Epistle, Alleluia and Gospel of the Sunday before the Exaltation of the Cross and of the feast.

Sunday Communion Verse and that of the feast.

