The 13th Day Of The Month Of September

Commemoration of the Dedication of the Church of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God

Forefeast of the Elevation of the Precious & Life-creating Cross

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr

Cornelius the Centurion

AT VESPERS

The usual kathisma

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the dedication, idiomela—

*In Tone VI:* In goodly fashion doth the old law mandate that dedications be honored, and all the more should the new law also be honored with dedications; for the islands are made new for God, as saith Isaiah, by which we should understand the Churches now built by the nations, which receive a firm foundation from God. Wherefore, let us spiritually celebrate these present festivities.

Be ye made new, O brethren, and, having put away the old man, live ye in newness of life, bridling all things from whence death cometh; let us chastise all our members, hating every evil fruit of the tree, and keeping this carefully in mind, let us avoid our ancient errors, that man may thus be restored. Therefore, the day of dedication is honored.

*The composition of Anatolius:* Thou didst set up Thy Church as a tower of strength, O Christ, Thou preëternal Word, for Thou didst found it upon the rock of the Faith. Wherefore, it abideth unshakable forever, having Thee Who, for its sake, immutably became man in latter times. Wherefore, giving thanks, we hymn Thee, saying: Thou art our King from before time began, and forever, and still yet. Glory be to Thee!

And 3 stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Beholding thy good works and thy divine supplications, O Cornelius, Christ sent a holy angel unto thee to enlighten thee wholly, and the foremost of the sacred apostles, who renewed thee with water and the Spirit with all thy household, O right glorious one, teaching thee sublime things through the grace of the Spirit.

Anointed with the oil of the priesthood, thou didst hasten to announce to all lands the preaching of salvation, uprooting the thorns of falsehood, O divinely wise one, and planting the true doctrine in men’s souls through the Spirit. Wherefore, in gladness, O Cornelius, we bless thee as a God-pleasing hierarch and an invincible martyr.

Following the character of thy goodness, the foolish were shown to be wise; and, having died and taken up thine abode in the grace according to the law of nature, thou makest it a wellspring of many wonders, O wise Cornelius, healing the sick and dispelling evil spirits through the Holy Spirit, O divinely inspired one.

Glory…, of the Dedication, idiomelon, the composition of John the monk, in Tone VI—

Celebrating the memory of the dedication, O Lord, and glorifying Thee, the Bestower of holiness, we pray: Let the senses of our souls be hallowed through the supplications of the glorious passion-bearers, O Good and Almighty One.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Today hath the Tree appeared! Today hath the Jewish race perished! Today is the Faith made manifest by faithful sovereigns! Adam hath recovered from his fall because of the Tree, and again, through the Tree, have the demons come to tremble. O Lord Almighty, glory be to Thee!

But if it be Friday evening: Now & ever…: the dogmaticon of the current tone.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Third Book of Kings

Solomon stood up in front of the altar before all the congregation of Israel; and he spread out his hands toward heaven: and he said: “O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like Thee in heaven above and on the earth beneath. If the heaven and the heaven of heavens will not suffice Thee, how much less even this house which I have built to Thy name? Yet, O Lord God of Israel, Thou shalt look upon my petition, to hear the prayer which Thy servant doth pray to Thee in Thy presence this day, that Thine eyes may be open to this house day and night, even toward the place of which Thou didst say: ‘My name shall be there, to hear the prayer which My servant prayeth at this place day and night.’ And Thou shalt hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, which they shall pray toward this place; and Thou shalt hear in Thy dwelling-place in heaven, and Thou shalt do and be gracious.”

A Reading from Proverbs

God by wisdom founded the earth, and by prudence He prepared the heavens. By understanding were the depths broken up, and the clouds dropped water. My son, let them not pass from thee, but keep my counsel and understanding: that thy soul may live, and that there may be grace round thy neck; and it shall be health to thy flesh, and safety to thy bones: that thou mayest go confidently in peace in all thy ways, and that thy foot may not stumble. For if thou sleep, thou shalt slumber sweetly. And thou shalt not be afraid of alarm coming upon thee, neither of approaching attacks of ungodly men. For the Lord shall be over all thy ways, and shall establish thy foot that thou be not moved. Forbear not to do good to the poor, whensoever thy hand may have power to help him. Say not, Come back another time, tomorrow I will give; while thou art able to do him good: for thou knowest not what the next day will bring forth. Devise not evil against thy friend, living near thee and trusting thee. Be not ready to quarrel with a man without cause, lest he do thee some harm. Procure not the reproaches of bad men, neither do thou covet their ways. For every transgressor is unclean before the Lord; neither doth he sit among the righteous. The curse of God is in the houses of the ungodly; but the habitations of the just are blessed. The Lord resisteth the proud; but He giveth grace to the humble.

A Reading from Proverbs

Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me!” And to those who lack understanding she saith: “Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you!” Leave folly, that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge. He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of saints is understanding: for to know the law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.

At the aposticha, stichera of the forefeast, in Tone V—

*Automelon:* Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross, invincible victory of piety, gate of paradise, confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been destroyed and abolished, and the power of death hath been trampled down, and we have been raised up from earth to the heavens, O invincible weapon, opponent of the demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, grant the world great mercy.

*Stichos:* Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for it is holy.

*In the same melody:* Rejoice, O Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been released from the curse, thou ensign of joy, who in thine exaltation drivest away the enemy, O most honored one, our helper, dominion of kings, might of the righteous, splendor of priests, who, when traced, dost deliver from evils, staff of power, whereby we are shepherded, weapon of peace around whom the angels stand in fear, divine glory of Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy!

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Rejoice, O guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the dead, who hast lifted us up who have fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, whereby the curse hath been annulled and incorruption hath blossomed forth, and we mortals have been deified, and the devil hath been utterly cast down! Beholding thee today uplifted in the arms of the hierarch, we exalt Him Who was lifted up upon thee, and we bow down before thee, richly drawing forth great mercy.

Glory…, of the Dedication, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II—

Celebrating the dedication of the most sacred temple of Thy resurrection, we glorify Thee, O Lord, Who hast sanctified it and perfected it with Thine all-perfect grace, Who art adorned therein by the faithful with sanctifying, mystic and sacred sacrifices, receivest unbloody and all-pure sacrifices from the hands of Thy servants, and bestowest great mercy and cleansing from sins upon those who rightly make offering.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

The Cross of the Bestower of life, a divine treasure hidden in the ground, was shown in the heavens to the pious emperor and noetically revealeth an inscription of victory of the enemy. And joyfully hastening in godly manner with faith and love to see it on high, he zealously lifted it from the bosom of the earth, for the deliverance of the world and the salvation of our souls.

Troparion of the Dedication, in Tone IV—

Thou didst show forth the beauty of the holy dwelling-place of Thy glory here below, O Lord, like the splendor of the firmament on high. Establish it for all ages, and through the Theotokos accept the supplications we unceasingly offer unto Thee therein, O Thou life and resurrection of all.

Glory…: Troparion of the hieromartyr, in the same tone—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even unto the shedding of thy blood. O hieromartyr Cornelius, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone—

O Lord, we offer unto Thee in supplication the life-creating Cross of Thy goodness, which Thou hast bestowed upon us, unworthy though we are. Save Thou all Orthodox Christians, and this Thy city, which entreateth Thee through the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the dedication, twice; Glory…, that of the hieromartyr; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Christ hath enlightened all by His advent and hath restored the world by His divine Spirit, and the souls of men are made new again; for a house hath now been raised up to the glory of the Lord, where Christ our God reneweth the hearts of the faithful, unto the salvation of men.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

O ye faithful, the festive day of the dedication hath overtaken us, decreeing that all the chosen of Christ be renewed, and that with radiant countenance they faithfully chant hymns from the depths of their hearts unto the Master, as the Deliverer Who reneweth us.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Three canons: that of the Dedication, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; that of the forefeast, with 4 troparia; and that of the hieromartyr, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Dedication, the composition of John the monk, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

O Christ Who of old guided Israel the chosen by a pillar, Thou didst plant the Church in Sion through the laver of baptism; and it crieth aloud: Let us chant a hymn to our God!

Today the coming of Thine unapproachable glory hath fashioned a heaven, the temple planted for Thee on earth; and therein we chant together a hymn to our God.

The Church is not adorned with the law, O Lord, nor by the outstretched hands of servants, but, boasting in the grace of the Cross, it singeth to Thee: Let us chant a hymn to our God!

*Theotokion:* At the will of the Father thou didst conceive without seed the Son of God through the divine Spirit, and gavest birth in the flesh to Him Who was begotten of the Father without mother and came forth from thee without father for our sake.

Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the \[Greek\] alphabet \(excluding the theotokia\), the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Be glad, O heaven, and rejoice, O earth! for the all-holy Cross cometh forth, sanctifying with grace us who venerate it as a wellspring of holiness and the cause of all deification.

O all-holy Cross, strengthen us who bow down before thee with faith, that we may piously tread the path of heaven, that, avoiding the pitfalls of the adversary, we may come to share in divine glory.

O most precious Cross, as we are acknowledged by the Creator through thee, we ever embrace thee with heart and soul, gazing upon thee as thou liest before us; and we are enlightened in mind, glorifying the Word, Who accomplisheth all things.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Theotokos, preserve thou the city of God the King of all, the God-pleasing and precious treasure, thy portion, which ever praiseth thee and honoreth thy birthgiving with faith.

Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the glory of thy wonders, O blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone V—

*Irmos:* Bringing battles to nought with His upraised arm, Christ hath overthrown horse and rider in the Red Sea, and hath saved Israel, who chanteth a hymn of victory.

By thy supplications, O divinely blessed hierarch, enlighten those who celebrate this thy splendid and divine repose, thine all-radiant memory and sacred festival.

Even before the mysteries of initiation were performed upon thee, thou wast shown to exercise thyself in almsgiving and prayer, O wise and most blessed Cornelius, seeking the Lord of all with upright mind.

When the preëminent of the apostles taught thee at the behest of the Master, O blessed one, thou didst manifestly learn the laws of the Savior Who, in the excess of His goodness, had united Himself to the flesh.

*Theotokion:* Thou settest the hearts of the faithful on fire, that they may ever glorify thee with never-ending love, O Mistress Theotokos; for thou art the glory of men, having given birth to the Lord of glory, O pure one.

*Katavasia:* Tracing an upright line with his staff, Moses divided the Red Sea for Israel which was travelling on foot; and striking it a transverse blow, he brought the waters together over the chariots of Pharaoh, thereby inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

Ode III

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

O Christ, by the Spirit Thou hast sanctified Thy Church on earth, anointing it today with the oil of Thy gladness.

O Good One, Thou hast revealed today the tabernacle, made of men’s hands, of Thy glory, which passeth understanding, a well-built dwelling-place.

Having Thee as an immovable foundation, O Christ, the Church is crowned with Thy Cross as with a royal diadem.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone on earth, O Mother of God, art the mediatress of good things which transcend nature; wherefore, we offer to thee the cry: Rejoice!

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Glorified and enlightened by thy precious embrace, O all-glorious Cross of the Lord, with faith we glorify thee, who art the glory of Christ.

Arriving in gladness, O ye faithful, let us draw forth the ever-living waters of the Cross as from a pure wellspring; and, saved, let us praise God.

In that He is life, Jesus died, hanging upon the Tree of the Cross; and embracing it now with faith, we drive away the passions, the mediators of death.

*Theotokion:* Having manifested thyself, O pure Virgin, dispel the darkness of my soul, crush thou the members of sin, and save me, O thou who gavest birth to the most Compassionate One.

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* O Christ Who by Thy command fixed the earth upon naught and suspended its weight unsupported: establish Thou Thy Church upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, O Thou Who alone art good and lovest mankind.

Thou and all thy household received the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit and all the grace of God through the divine mouth and by the arrival of the preëminent apostle of God, who declared the doctrines of salvation unto you.

Exalted in the virtues like a cedar of lofty stature, O blessed hierarch Cornelius, thou hast put forth for us fragrant fruits: the gift of doctrines, the grace of miracles and the working of healings.

Having been vouchsafed the greatest of splendor, O Cornelius, with the preëminent apostle and many others thou didst make haste to announce the divine proclamation everywhere; and we, enlightened thereby, have been delivered from the darkness of ignorance.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the radiant habitation of purity, bearing the incarnate Bestower of light, Who in His love for mankind manifested Himself as a man like unto us and destroyed corruption, O all-pure Virgin Bride of God, thou incorrupt restoration of men.

*Katavasia:* The rod of Aaron is taken to be an image of the mystery, for by its budding forth it chose one priest over others; and for the Church, which before was barren, the tree of the Cross hath now budded forth, for her might and confirmation.

Kontakion of the dedication, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Church hath been shown to be a heaven of great splendor, which enlighteneth all the faithful; and, standing therein, we cry aloud: Establish this house, O Lord!

Sessional hymn of the dedication, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded…”—

Christ showed forth the tabernacle of witness; the godly Moses set it up on earth; and Solomon dedicated the temple with sacrifices; and we, hastening to the new Jerusalem with faith, like David utter divine hymnody unto Him Who was crucified for our sake, asking forgiveness for all things wherein we have sinned.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Church received thee as the holy firstfruits from among the gentiles; and thou enlightenest it with thy virtuous deeds, O divinely wise Cornelius, initiate of sacred mysteries.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the forefeast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Moses stretched out his arms to heaven on high, prefiguring the Cross, the divine weapon of the faithful, to which Christ nailed our sins. Wherefore, the enemy wept, his senses wounded painfully, and said: “This spear of wood hath pierced my heart! Christ releaseth all from the bonds of hell!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The Church is sprinkled not with the sacrifices of dumb beasts, but with the precious and life-bearing blood which flowed from Thy side; and it crieth out in splendor: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The beloved habitations of the Lord cry out together to those who desire plainly to see the glory of His countenance: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Portraying the anointing of Thy chosen people, the Church is anointed today with costly ointments, invisibly receiving the divine grace of the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, and even after giving birth thou wast shown to be virginal still; wherefore, with never-ceasing voices and unwavering love we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Mistress!

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

The Cross of the Lord, which is worshipped by the faithful, is seen to be as bright as the sun; and as we kiss it our souls are enlightened.

God the Lord hath appeared incarnate, uplifted upon the Tree; and He enlighteneth those who bow down before it, ever delivering them from evils.

Grant cleansing from offenses, O Word of God, unto those who today bow down with faith before Thy precious Cross, which lieth before us.

*Theotokion:* Without abandoning the bosom of the Father, the Word descended into thy womb as a babe, O Maiden, desiring to restore me who lie subject to corruption.

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Perceiving Thy divine condescension prophetically, O Christ, Habbakuk cried out to Thee with trembling: Thou art come for the salvation of Thy people, to save Thine anointed ones!

Receiving the grace of the Spirit, O all-praised Cornelius, thou didst pass over the earth like a radiant sun, dispelling the darkness of idolatry.

Issuing forth like a great river, thou waterest the whole face of the earth with divine teachings, choking the tares of polytheism, O Cornelius.

Having died to all the world, O most blessed Cornelius, thou didst announce to all those dead through the passions the divine resurrection of Him Who was slain for our sake.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin, thou didst supernaturally become the precious dwelling-place of the Wisdom of the Father, by Whom we have now been delivered from the malice of the crafty one.

*Katavasia:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have considered Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Ode V

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

On Sinai of old Thou didst show to Moses the God-seer a tabernacle not made by men’s hands, O Christ, prefiguring Thy Church.

O Lord, thou didst build a tabernacle on the earth, and by Thy power Thou dost join the ranks of heaven to the choirs of men.

O Lord, we know Thee to be the Source of life. And arriving, O holy Christ, Thou didst proclaim peace to Thy Church.

*Theotokion:* We wield thee against the enemy as a mighty weapon, O Bride of God, for we have acquired thee as our dominion and the hope of our salvation.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Against the corrupting passions strengthen us who honor and venerate thee, O precious Cross, most holy ensign of the holy Passion.

O ye faithful, illumined today in heart and soul with goodly sights, let us approach and bow down before the sacred and divine Tree.

Moses of old, in sweetening the waters of Marah, prefigured thee with a tree, O precious Cross, for thou hast exuded the sweetness of salvation for men.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Maiden, pray thou for us to Christ Who was clad in material flesh through thy precious blood and hath renewed mortals.

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* O Thou Who art clothed in light as with a garment: I rise at dawn unto Thee, and to Thee do I cry: enlighten Thou my gloom-enshrouded soul, O Christ, in that Thou alone art compassionate!

Cleaving wholly to the Almighty, even when subjected to violence by vile and murderous men thou didst not offer worship to deaf idols, O initiate of sacred mysteries.

In supplications thou didst call upon the invisible God Most High, O Cornelius, and, causing great wonder, didst demolish the temple of the abominable idols.

Keeping the commandments of the Almighty, thou didst endure imprisonment and didst loose the foolish from the bonds of false belief, O divinely wise one.

*Theotokion:* Rain down upon me remission of sins, O all-pure one, and visit me who am afflicted and buffeted by the perils of life and the passions of the flesh.

*Katavasia:* O thrice-blessed Tree, whereon the King and Lord was crucified, and whereby he who beguiled mankind by the tree did fall! He was beguiled by thee when God was nailed in the flesh, Who granteth peace unto our souls!

Ode VI

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Christ the King desired the beauty of the Church He now hath chosen, and hath shown her to be the mother of the gentiles, who out of slaves have been made sons by the Spirit.

The hordes of the malicious demons tremble before the Church of Christ which is marked with the sign of the image of the Cross and covered with the overshadowing of the Spirit.

Having Christ, and not sand, as its foundation, the Church of the nations is crowned with unapproachable beauty and adorned with a royal diadem.

*Theotokion:* O wonder more recent than all other wonders! The Virgin hath without knowing man conceived in her womb Him Who sustaineth all things, yet hath not confined Him.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

The Creator, His side pierced while He hung suspended upon thee of His own will, O Cross, poured forth blood and water, whereby we who kiss thee with faith have been edified.

O life-giving Tree of the Lord, thou wellspring of immortality and deliverance of the whole world, save us who venerate thee as our saving protector.

Thou hast been shown to us as a mighty weapon, whereby in sacred manner we kiss thee with uprightness of soul and overpower all the assaults of the adversary, O divine Cross.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou wast the holy temple of Him Who resteth in the saints; wherefore, illumine us who hymn thee with faith, O Virgin Mother.

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* O Christ Master, still Thou the sea of the passions which rageth with a soul-destroying tempest, and lead me up from corruption, in that Thou art compassionate.

While offering up thy supplications in purity, thou didst manifestly behold the angel of God, who taught thee the exalted things of salvation.

Enlightened by the Spirit, thou wast shown to be a light-giving star illumining the ends of the earth with radiant splendors, O Cornelius, initiate of sacred mysteries.

O blessed one who before wast benighted by falsehood, having recognized the Lord of glory thou didst obtain sight through thy supplication, and didst receive divine cleansing for thy whole household.

*Theotokion:* The Lord of glory became incarnate of thy virginal blood in a way that He alone knoweth, O most hymned one, saving us by His goodness.

*Katavasia:* Stretching forth his arms in the form of a cross in the belly of the sea monster, Jonah clearly prefigured the saving Passion. And, issuing forth after three days, he foreshadowed the transcendent resurrection of Christ God, Who was nailed in the flesh and enlightened the world by His rising on the third day.

Another kontakion of the Dedication, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

Grant inner enlightenment and spiritual renewal of heart unto those who with faith celebrate the sacred dedication of the temple of Thy house, which it was Thy good pleasure to have built unto Thy divine name, O Thou Who art glorious in the saints.

*Ikos:* The most wise Solomon of old, celebrating the memorial of the dedication, brought dumb beasts as whole-burnt offerings and sacrifices to God; and now, when truth and grace have come to earth, He Who offered Himself as sacrifice for our salvation hath abolished the sacrifices, in that He loveth mankind. He Who alone is glorious in the saints hath sanctified the church and shown it to be unshakable.

Ode VII

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Of old the flame of the furnace was shown to be dew-bearing; and now spiritual anointing with oil doth sanctify those who cry out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

In this new tabernacle, as in the God-receiving furnace, all of us who are of the spiritual Israel cry out, bedewed: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

O ye who are wounded with most sweet divine desire, come ye, let us join ourselves to Christ the Bridegroom in this bridal-chamber, crying: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O divine and hallowed abode of the Most High! For through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Of old, O precious Cross, Jacob prefigured thee in blessing the children of Joseph; but we, bowing down now, honor thee, drawing forth enlightenment.

The sayings of the divine prophets have now received their fulfillment, O most sacred Cross; for the Lord of all hath been lifted up upon thee, delivering all from corruption.

Embracing thee now with heart and mouth, O most precious Cross, we ever draw forth sanctity, health and salvation of soul and body.

*Theotokion:* O blessed Virgin, pray thou for us who entreat thee, for we all place our hope in thee and cry out to thee: O Mistress, disdain not thy flock!

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers quenched the flame and bedewed the children, who sang together: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Thou wast the firstfruits of the gentiles, O Cornelius; for thou wast the first to receive holy baptism and the grace of the Spirit, like the divinely eloquent ones before thee.

Performing most magnificent miracles through divine grace, thou didst draw to the Faith those who from of old were steeped in false knowledge, teaching them to chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Hidden in the earth and protected by a bush, O wise one, thou wast revealed by the words of God, pouring forth the grace of miracles and driving away infirmities.

O Cornelius, thou wast shown to be the sweet-sounding harp of the doctrines of salvation, making sweet the souls of all, and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Triadicon:* Let us all glorify the Unity in three Hypostases: the all-unoriginate Father, the consubstantial Son, and the Holy Spirit, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Virgin, thou hast been shown to have deified human nature by thy divine birthgiving; wherefore, as is meet we, the faithful, glorify thee.

*Katavasia:* The mad command of the impious tyrant, breathing forth threats and blasphemy hateful to God, cast the people into confusion. Yet the three children feared not the fury of the wild beasts, nor the roaring blaze; but, in the midst of the fire, when the dew-bearing wind blew upon it, they sang: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Today Thy Church hath been adorned like a bride with a noetic robe woven on high of divine grace, O Lord, and she summoneth her people to chant in gladness: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Today Christ, the second Adam, hath shown forth a noetic garden of paradise, this new tabernacle which, instead of the tree of knowledge, offereth the life-bearing weapon of the Cross unto those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Triadicon:* Worshipping Thee, the unoriginate Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one Godhead, perfect, unoriginate, indivisible, consubstantial, unconfused, in three Hypostases, we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou, O all-pure Virgin, alone among all generations hast been shown to be the Mother of God; thou wast the dwelling-place of the Godhead, O most immaculate one, who wast not consumed by the fire of Light unapproachable. Wherefore, we all bless thee, O Mary Bride of God.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Let us bow down before the Cross of the Lord, the unbroken weapon of salvation, the ready help of the faithful, our mighty defense, which now lieth before us all.

Prefiguring thee, the most precious Cross, Moses lifted a brazen serpent up high on a pole to oppose the serpents, as it is written, and by thee we are delivered from the deception of the noetic serpents.

Thou art the enlightenment of our souls, O light-giving and most precious Cross; for, embracing thee, with thy divine power we cut down the princes and powers of darkness.

*Theotokion:* We honor the pure Virgin who, for our salvation, gave birth supernaturally to the unoriginate and uncreated Word, crying out in hymnody: We bless thy birthgiving, O Virgin!

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The children, forming a universal chorus in the furnace, chanted to Thee, the Creator of all: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With uprightness of mind thou didst speak of the one God Who appeared on earth from among the spiritual beings; wherefore, O God-bearer, thou becamest the honored firstfruits of the gentiles and the receptacle of the Spirit.

With the burning ember of thy fiery words, O blessed one, thou didst burn up the tinder of vainglory; wherefore, thou hast passed over to the never-waning Light, illumining all who hymn thee with love.

O divinely wise Cornelius, the Word Who calleth all things into being out of nothingness was to thee thy portion and lot, thy help and deliverer, thy might and boast, thy light and guide.

*Triadicon:* O holy Father, holy Word, most holy and uncreated Spirit, indivisible Trinity: save those who with love hymn Thy dominion, kingdom and majesty.

*Theotokion:* Pour forth upon us thy mercies in abundance, O holy Maiden, and ask for us the forgiveness of all our transgressions, whether committed in knowledge or in ignorance, and those which we made through inattention.

*Katavasia:* O children equal in number to the Trinity: bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who giveth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

Ode IX

Canon of the Dedication

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Come ye with a pure heart and, gazing with wakeful spiritual eyes upon the beauty of the Church, the daughter of the King, which outshineth gold in luster, let us magnify her.

Rejoice and be glad, O bride of the great King, radiantly beholding the beauty of thy Bridegroom, crying out with thy people: We magnify Thee, O Bestower of life!

O Savior, grant Thy Church excellence from on high, for she acknowledgeth none other than Thee Who of old laid down Thy life for her; and she is great in this knowledge.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O joyous Bride of the great King; for through thee, O pure one, have we been delivered from the curse of Eve, and we have found life in thy birthgiving, O unwedded one.

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Suspended upon thee, Christ truly raised up that which had fallen into the depths of perdition, O Cross of the Lord; wherefore, we now bow down before thee with love, and honor and glorify thee.

Let us purify our souls and hearts with good works alone, and, beholding the saving Tree which lieth in our midst, with divine wisdom let us bow down before it with faith and love.

Like the great sun thou dost illumine those in darkness with thy brilliance, and drivest away the demons, O most beautiful Cross; wherefore, we cry out: Illumine all who bow down before thee with faith!

*Theotokion:* Illumine me with divine light, O Virgin, thou receptacle of the Light, truly dispelling the darkness of my passions and the most profound night of pleasures, O most holy Theotokos.

Canon of the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O Isaiah! The Virgin hath conceived in her womb and borne a Son, Immanuel, both God and man. Orient is His name; and, magnifying Him, we call the Virgin blessed.

The Church summoneth all to a sacred festival, thine honored memorial, O preacher of Christ; for thou wast shown to be standing with the holy disciples as their peer, having, like them, inherited the Holy Spirit.

Thou wast adorned with dogmas of piety as a sacred priest, and didst emulate the divine servants of God; and thou dost ever pour forth rivers of healing, driving away the sickness of men, O most sacred Cornelius.

Adorned with the robe of salvation which the incarnate Christ wove, thou now goest about the kingdom on high with all joy, gazing in purity upon the incomprehensible beauty of the Bridegroom, O right glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Ask enlightenment for us, O thou who gavest birth to the Light Who shone forth from Light, and drive far from me the darkness of pleasures and temptations, O all-pure Mistress, our intercessor unashamed.

*Katavasia:* O Theotokos, thou art a mystical paradise, which, untilled, did put forth Christ, by Whom the life-bearing tree of the Cross was planted. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion of the Dedication: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

The most wondrous and most precious and holy Church, which Thou didst redeem through Thine all-pure blood, O good Word, renew by the Spirit, and adorn it with most divine rays, glorifying it with glory by those who celebrate the dedication of thy temple as is meet.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the forefeast, in the same melody—

With light-giving splendors the Cross of the Lord summoneth to its elevation all who with divine love stand before it. Come ye all, and with joy, love, fear and faith let us kiss it and glorify the one Creator and Master!

On the Praises, 6 stichera of the Dedication: 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Today the divine, sacred, honored and light-bearing house of the resurrection of Christ is splendidly consecrated, and His sepulcher giveth divine life unto the world; a wellspring of immortality gusheth forth, pouring forth streams of miracles, and, overflowing with the waters of grace, it granteth healings unto those who hymn it with faith.

Shining forth from on high, a radiant beam hath shone forth, illumining all; wherefore, with faith let us all honor the resurrection of Christ the Creator and in hymns let us celebrate the life-bearing and divine festival of the dedication, and let us be jubilant in psalms, that we may find the Savior and Lord to be merciful to us.

Desiring to see beforehand the holy scepter of the Cross borne aloft in the midst of the earth, let us purify our souls in advance, and being illumined with light, let us render our thoughts radiant, and, shining with divine power let us hymn Christ Who imparteth His holiness through the precious Tree unto those who cry out with faith and fervently hymn Him.

And 3 stichera idiomela—

*The composition of John the Monk, in Tone I:* Be thou renewed, be thou restored, O new Jerusalem! For thy light hath come, and the glory of the Lord hath shone upon thee! This house hath the Father built! This house hath the Son established! This house hath the Holy Spirit restored, Who illumineth, maketh firm and doth sanctify our souls!

*The composition of Anatolius:* Solomon of old, in consecrating the temple, offered up sacrifices and wholeburnt offerings of dumb beasts, O Lord. But since Thou, O Savior, wast well pleased to abolish the prefigurings that the truth might be known, the generations of men offer unbloody sacrifices to Thy glory; for Thou dost sanctify all things through the Holy Spirit, O Thou Who hast dominion over all.

*The composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV:* The Church of the nations is renewed today through the precious and life-bearing blood which flowed from the all-pure and incorrupt side of Christ our God, Who was incarnate of the holy Virgin. Wherefore, assembling, ye choirs of the faithful, let us glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one Godhead Who sustaineth all things.

Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone III—

Arise unto thyself, O man! Be thou new instead of old! And celebrate the restoration of the soul while yet thou hast life, that the path of all life may be restored to thee; for the old hath passed away, and, lo! all things are new! Transformed by a change for the good, offer this to the feast as fruit. Thus is man made new, and thus is the day of the dedication honored.

Now & ever…, of the forefeast, the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone—

O Christ our God, Who for the common resurrection of the human race didst accept voluntary crucifixion, and by the pen of the Cross didst stain Thy fingers with blood as with ink of royal purple, and in Thy love for mankind didst as King affix Thy signature to the document of our remission: Disdain us not who are in distress and again are far from Thee, but have pity upon Thy people who find themselves in evil circumstances, O Long-suffering One. Arise Thou, and do battle with those who fight against us, in that Thou art almighty.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes: 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Dedication.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.

*Stichos:* The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty.

Epistle to the Hebrews, §307 \[Heb. 3: 1-4\]

Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, Who was faithful to Him Who appointed Him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house. For this Man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as He Who built the house hath more honor than the house. For every house is built by some man, but He Who hath built all things is God.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* His foundations are in the holy mountains.

*Stichos:* Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 67

\[Mt. 16: 13-18\]

At that time, when Jesus came into the coasts of Cæsarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father Who is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build My church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Communion Verse—

O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth.

