The 15th Day Of The Month Of September

The Afterfeast Of The Exaltation Of The Precious Cross Of The Lord

The Commemoration Of The Holy Greatmartyr Nicetas

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Lesna Icon of the Theotokos\)

At Vespers

N.B.: Should the commemoration fall on the Sunday after the Exaltation of the Precious Cross, see notes at the end of the service for special directions.

At “Lord, I have cried...”, six stichera: three for the feast, and three for the saint. The stichera to the Cross, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O Life-bearing Cross....”—

Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross, invincible victory of piety, gate of paradise, confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been destroyed and abolished, and the power of death hath been trampled down, and we have been raised up from earth to the heavens, O invincible weapon, opponent of the demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, grant the world great mercy.

Rejoice, O Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been released from the curse, thou ensign of joy, who in thine exaltation drivest away the enemy, O most honored one, our helper, dominion of kings, might of the righteous, splendor of priests, who, when traced, dost deliver from evils, staff of power, whereby we are shepherded, weapon of peace around whom the angels stand in fear, divine glory of Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy!

Rejoice, O guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the dead, who hast lifted us up who have fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, whereby the curse hath been annulled and incorruption hath blossomed forth, and we mortals have been deified, and the devil hath been utterly cast down! Beholding thee today uplifted in the arms of the hierarch, we exalt Him Who was lifted up upon thee, and we bow down before thee, richly drawing forth great mercy.

These stichera to the saint, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of Heaven....”—

Arrayed in the armor of piety, thou wast shown to be a champion of Christ, the King of all, O passion-bearer Nicetas, as was almighty Gideon of old, setting at nought legions of aliens by thy noble boldness.

That which is alien didst thou enslave by thine all-powerful faith in Christ, O divinely wise martyr who didst endure suffering. Wherefore, thou didst turn the barbarians to the Creator and Master of all, O wise one, and they glorify Him piously.

Thou, the firstfruits of the barbarians, O martyr, dying for the Trinity, didst bring glory to Christ, and wast shown to be a divinely eloquent sufferer. Wherefore, thou hast manifestly received a crown, and dost shine with splendor in the world like a beacon, O right glorious one.

Glory..., to the saint, in Tone VI: the composition of Theophanes—

We know thee as a lamp unto the martyrs, O Nicetas, sufferer for Christ, for, having forsaken the glory of earthly rank and despised the godlessness of thy father, thou didst shatter his gods, didst triumphantly put the barbarians to shame, didst undergo martyrdom for confessing Christ, and wast a warrior of the God of Heaven. Entreat thou the Benefactor of all in our behalf, that He take pity and save our souls.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone—

The voices of the prophets foretold the holy Tree whereby Adam was loosed from the ancient curse of death, and creation raiseth a cry to that which today is exalted, begging great mercy of God. O Master, Who alone art boundless in loving-kindness: be Thou our cleansing and save our souls!

Entrance; the Great Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Our God is in Heaven and on earth; all things soever He hath willed, He hath done.

*Stichos:* When Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among a barbarous people, Judæa became His sanctuary.

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, O Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

Then, the ektenia: “Let us all say....”

But if it fall on Sunday, we chant the Prokimenon of the day: “The Lord is King...”, and the Great Prokimenon we chant on the eve of the feast.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside....”—

Raised on high, the Cross exhorteth all creation to hymn the all-pure Passion of Him Who was lifted up thereon. For thereon having slain him who slew us, in that He is merciful, He gave life unto the dead, and in the exceeding greatness of His goodness He hath made them beautiful and vouchsafed them to live in the heavens. Wherefore, rejoicing, we exalt His name, and magnify His extreme condescension.

*Stichos:* Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for He is holy.

Moses prefigured Thee, stretching forth his arms on high, and vanquished the tyrant Amalek, O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, confirmation of sufferers, savior of all the venerable. Wherefore, creation, beholding thee lifted up, is gladdened, and keepeth festival, glorifying Christ, Who through thee hath gathered the dispersed in His extreme goodness.

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

O most precious Cross, who art today exalted, and about whom the ranks of angels stand in gladness, by divine command thou dost uplift all who for the stealing of the fruit were driven out and were sunk in death. Wherefore, we, the faithful, venerating thee with hearts and lips, derive from thee sanctification, crying out: Exalt ye Christ, the all-good God, and worship His divine footstool.

Glory..., of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Thou didst show thyself to be the namesake of victory, O most honored martyr Nicetas; proclaiming Christ our God amid thy struggle, thou didst confess Him before kings and tormentors. Wherefore, cease thou never in thy prayers to Him Who alone loveth mankind, in behalf of the world, for Christ-loving kings, and for all who faithfully keep thy memory, that He deliver them from all wrath.

Now and ever..., for the feast, in the same tone—

O God, the words of Moses Thy prophet have been fulfilled, who said: “Ye shall see your life hanging before your eyes!” Today the Cross is exalted, and the world is freed from deception. Today the resurrection of Christ is renewed, and the ends of the earth rejoice, offering music to Thee on cymbals, like David, and saying: “Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, O God: the Cross and resurrection! For their sake Thou hast saved us, O Good One Who lovest mankind! O Almighty Lord, glory be to Thee!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Taking up the Cross of Christ ardently, as it were a sword, thou didst make haste to do battle with the enemy, and, having later suffered by fire for Christ, thou didst commit thy sacred soul to the Lord, and hence thou hast been vouchsafed to receive from Him gifts of healing, O greatmartyr Nicetas. Entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the Troparion to the Cross: “O Lord, save Thy people....”

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the Troparion of the feast, twice; Glory..., of the saint; Now and ever..., of the feast again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Full of loving-kindness...”—

When Thou wast crucified, O Christ Master, the dominion and might of death were overthrown, and all the tyranny of the enemy was trampled down, and they who died of old through the tree of disobedience were given life by the Tree of the Cross. Wherefore, we hymn Thy sufferings.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the above is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “The beauty of thy virginity....”—

Thou didst will to suffer death and the Cross, fixing it in the midst of creation; when it was Thy good pleasure that Thy body be pierced with nails, the sun hid its rays. Beholding these things, the thief on the cross hymned thee, crying out: Remember me, O Lord! And, believing, he received paradise.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the above is repeated.

Two canons: the canon for the Elevation of the Cross, with six troparia including the Irmos; and the canon of the saint, with six troparia.

Ode I

The Canon of the feast, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Tracing an upright line with his staff, Moses divided the Red Sea for Israel, which was travelling on foot; and striking it a transverse blow, he brought the waters together over the chariots of Pharaoh, thereby inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

Of old, Moses prefigured in himself an image of Christ’s most pure sufferings, standing between the priests; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the destroyer Amalek. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified!

Upon a pole did Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, and the deliverance therefrom, for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified!

The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast down, delusion was destroyed and the divine faith spread to the ends of the earth. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified!

The Canon of the Saint, in Tone IV, the composition of Theophanes, the Acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Nicetas, the namesake of victory.”

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Having slain the arrogance of my flesh, illumine thou my mind with the radiance of enlightenment, that I may hymn thy victory, O Nicetas, who, as a most eminent victor, dost entreat Christ.

Putting aside the poison which cometh from the passions, thou didst mightily endure wounds and in suffering didst clothe thyself in a precious robe, dyed with thine own blood.

Having been nailed to the Tree for us, Thou didst show the path of suffering to be new and wondrous, for Thou, O Master, wast the source of the strength and confession of the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* The portal of Thy condescension towards us do we mystically call her who supernaturally shone Thee forth, the East, the Sun and Light, Who lovest mankind, Who art of two natures.

Ode III

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* The rod of Aaron is taken to be an image of the mystery, for by its budding forth it chose one priest over others; and for the Church, which before was barren, the Tree of the Cross hath now budded forth, for her might and confirmation.

The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hardhearted people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross is the might and confirmation.

When Christ’s all-pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

With steadfastness of soul didst thou endure the threats of the tormentors, O glorious martyr of Christ, aided by power divine.

O all-praised martyr of Christ, enduring the scattering of thy flesh and the dismemberment of thy limbs, thou didst obtain thy soul.

The assembly of Christ’s martyrs rejoice in thee, beholding thy memory celebrated today.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, pure and honored abode of virginity: heal thou the wounds of my heart.

The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou Who wast lifted up willingly on the Cross, bestow Thy compassions upon the new community called after Thee, O Christ God; gladden by Thy power Orthodox Christians, granting them victory over all adversaries. May they have as an ally the invincible trophy, Thy weapon of peace.

*Ikos:* He who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he unto the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to understand? — God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this boast, the Cross of the Lord: for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace.

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou that wast lifted up....”—

Showing thyself to be an invincible warrior, thou didst overcome the cunning of the barbarians and, having suffered, O glorious one, thou didst most mightily enslave hosts of invisible foes. Wherefore, thou didst receive a crown of victory. O blessed Nicetas, cease thou never to pray for us that hymn thee with faith. *twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone—

Raising his hands up to the heavens, Moses prefigured the Cross, the divine weapon of the faithful, to which Christ nailed our sins. Wherefore, the enemy wept pathetically, his senses wracked with pain; and he said: The spear of the Tree hath pierced me in the midst of my heart! Christ hath released all from the bonds of hell!

Ode IV

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Of old, Moses transformed with a tree the bitter springs in the desert, showing forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.

Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.

In a sacred manner did the people encamp in four divisions, and proceeding in this fashion to the Tabernacle of the Witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation of their ranks.

Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens declared the glory of our God.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Redeemed by the blood of the Master, the sufferer Nicetas doth offer his blood to Christ, rejoicing. Wherefore, slaughtered, he cried out: Glory to Thee, O my God!

Aflame with love for the Master, O martyr, thou didst trample down the flame of idolatry and all the might of the demons, crying unto the Creator: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Delighting in the sight of the Lord and revelling in the radiance thereof, the martyr knew not suffering, but, rejoicing, cried out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* The all-pure Virgin, O Christ, the animate heaven of Thee, the King of kings, which is adorned with a different radiance, is now glorified as the Theotokos.

Ode V

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* O thrice-blessed Tree, whereon Christ, our King and Lord, was crucified, and whereby he who beguiled mankind by the tree did fall, when God was nailed in the flesh, Who granteth peace to our souls!

O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched, the whirling sword which guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread Cherubim withdrew, when Christ was nailed to thee, He that granteth peace unto our souls.

The adverse powers of the netherworld fear when the sign of the Cross is traced in the air in which they live, and the generations of the earthborn and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ Who granteth peace unto our souls.

Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto the benighted gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

O all-praised Nicetas, who can describe the crowns of thine ordeals, which Christ gave thee who suffered for Him?

Having completed their struggles upon the earth, the martyrs have received from Thee, O Bestower of life, a heavenly reward in the highest.

Now dost thou shine forth like a beacon, O all-praised Nicetas. Thou art become a light of secondary radiance, standing gloriously before the great Light.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, thou didst give birth unto the timeless Light Who became subject to time for us who are in the darkness of this life, and thou hast illumined the whole world thereby.

Ode VI

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his arms in the form of the Cross in the belly of the sea monster, Jonah clearly prefigured the saving passion. And issuing forth after three days, he foreshadowed the transcendent resurrection of Christ God, Who was nailed in the flesh and hath enlightened the world by His rising on the third day.

Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he crossed his hands, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who was nailed thereon in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the Law of the Scripture which was written with shadows, and hath dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.

Diving Israel, laying his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the young, revealed that the people that hath the honor of being the elder is a slave to the Law. Wherefore, when suspected of erring in so doing, he did not alter the life-bearing image, for, he said, protected by the Cross, the newly established people of Christ God shall surpass them.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Desiring the beauties of the Creator, O glorious one, and receiving illumination therefrom, thou didst take wing, O martyr, and, scorning death, didst draw nigh unto Him.

O martyr Nicetas, preferring with chaste thought those things which are inexhaustible to receiving transitory things, with gladness thou didst submit thy body to tortures.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, finding thee alone to be an apple amid a grove, a lily most pure and a lily of the valley, the noetic Bridegroom dwelt within thee.

Kontakion of the Saint, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the heights...”—

Having cut down the dominion of deception by thy resistance, and received a crown of victory in thy sufferings, thou dost rejoice with the angels, O Nicetas, namesake of victory, unceasingly praying with them to Christ God in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Having set the knowledge of Thee in my soul, cleanse Thou my mind and show me forth as a keeper of Thy commandments, O Savior, that I may be able to conquer the divers rebellions of my passions, receiving the honor of the victory of dispassion, through the prayers of Thy mighty martyr and passion-bearer Nicetas, O Thou Who lovest mankind. For Thou Thyself hast called us to remember on the day of his commemoration him who doth unceasingly pray for us all.

Ode VII

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* The mad command of the ungodly tyrant, breathing forth threats and blasphemy hateful to God, cast the people into confusion. Yet the three youths feared not the fury of the wild beasts, nor the raging blaze; but in the midst of the fire, when the dew-bearing wind blew upon it, they sang: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The first man, tasting of the tree, made his abode in corruption; for, having condemned himself by an inglorious rejection of life, he imparted a certain talent as a corruption to the whole race. But we, the earthborn, gaining utterance through the Tree of the Cross, cry out: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Disobedience violated the commandment of God, and the tree brought death to man by its being partaken of unseasonably, for, for the preservation of that which is most precious, the tree of life was forbidden; but God disclosed it to the hapless thief who cried out rightly: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the Kingdom, for it is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry out with faith: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

O martyr, who art now illumined with unapproachable radiance, with thy radiance enlighten those who now sing thy feast, crying: Blessed art Thou, O my Lord and God!

The angelic armies were astounded at thy courage, O blessed one, beholding thee patiently suffering and saying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord and God of all!

*Theotokion:* With the choir on high the incorporeal Gabriel cried out to thee in gladness: Rejoice, O pure Virgin! Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* O children, equal in number to the Trinity, bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word, Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who imparteth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

O hosts of Heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched with the Blood of God the Word incarnate, celebrating the restoration of those of earth. Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, whereby the resurrection of the world is accomplished forever!

O ye earthborn stewards of grace, in sacred manner raise on high with your hands the Cross whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the Body of God the Word, that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him forever.

O ye faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having received from God the precious Cross, the victorious weapon, rejoice therein, for thereby tribes of warriors seeking courage are scattered abroad forever.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

O invincible martyr, thou didst bring thyself as a sacrifice whole and acceptable, and wast a savory whole-burnt offering to thy Master, Who was crucified for our sake; and with gladness didst thou cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

As thou wast lawfully a divine contender, thou didst worthily receive an imperishable crown of victory from the life-bearing right hand of God, before which thou now dost stand, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Boundless was thy love of Christ, and pierced by many wounds and variously gored, thou didst mingle thy blood with His. And now, as an emulator of Him, thou dost reign with Him, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O pure and all-immaculate Theotokos, who didst give birth to Christ Who alone is most pure, thou hast clearly washed away the defilement of our nature, and art more highly exalted than the cherubim and seraphim, who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon to the Cross

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou art a mystical garden of paradise, which, untilled, didst put forth Christ, by Whom the life-bearing Tree of the Cross was planted. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee.

Let all the trees of the forest rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him Who planted them in the beginning — Christ Who was stretched upon the Tree. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

A sacred horn hath arisen, the chief horn for all the divinely wise—the Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Canon to the Saint

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

My whole self do I offer thee, O divinely blessed Nicetas, that I may find thee to be an intercessor before the Master who can save me from every evil circumstance, and a mediator of divine salvation.

Thou wast truly a witness to the truth, O passion-bearer, and now dost stand, rejoicing, before precious Truth personified, boldly accepting the reward for thy struggles.

Arriving at the calm harbor, thou didst rest from thy pains, and, a crown-bearer, thou dost rejoice in paradise with the martyrs of Christ. Wherefore, thee do we all now fittingly glorify as one glorified by God.

*Theotokion:* In a manner transcending the laws of nature, O pure and blessed one, thou gavest birth unto the Lawgiver Who in His loving-kindness immutably became flesh and is known in two natures.

Exapostilarion of the saint: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women....”—

Defending himself with the weapon of Thy precious Cross, Thy sufferer, O Word, mightily vanquished the powers of the adversary, and put the tormentors to shame, and suffered for Thee; and with Thee, O my Christ, King of all, doth Nicetas reign. *twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the feast in the same melody—

Today is the Cross raised on high, and the world is sanctified; for He that sitteth with the Father and the Holy Spirit stretched out his arms thereon. It hath brought the whole world to the knowledge of Thee, O Christ. Therefore, to those who hope in Thee do Thou vouchsafe divine glory.

At the Aposticha, these stichera in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha....”—

Today is exalted the Cross of Christ, the life-bearing Tree, whereon He was nailed in the flesh.

*Stichos:* Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for He is holy.

Rejoice, divine preservation of the faithful, unassailable rampart, thou Cross of the Lord, whereby we are exalted above the earth.

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Come ye, and in gladness let us all venerate the life-bearing Tree whereon was stretched Christ our deliverance.

Glory..., of the saint, in Tone VI—

Today the whole world rejoiceth in the suffering of the passion-bearer, and the Church of Christ, adorned with flowers, crieth out to thee, O martyr of Christ: O favorite of Christ and most fervent intercessor, cease thou never to pray for thy servants!

Now and ever..., in the same tone—

Today is put forth from the impenetrable bosom of the earth the shoot of life, and it announceth the resurrection of Christ Who was nailed thereto; and, lifted up by priestly hands, it proclaimeth His ascension to Heaven, whereby our nature, which was bound to the earth by the fall, doth now dwell in the heavens. Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry out: O Lord Who wast lifted up thereon and thereby raised us up with Thyself: vouchsafe us Thy heavenly joys, as Thou art He Who lovest mankind.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes: four troparia from Ode I of the canon to the Cross, and four troparia from Ode VI of the canon to the saint.

At the Entrance, we end the hymn “O come let us worship...” with the words: “O Son of God Who wast crucified in the flesh, save us who chant unto Thee: Alleluia.” And we sing thus until the Leave-taking.

Prokimenon of the feast, also chanted each day until the Leave-taking. And then that of the saint, in Tone VII—

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to Timothy, §292 \[II Tim. 2:1-10\]

Brethren: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elects’ sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §36

\[Matt. 10:16-22\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.”

Communion verse of the feast, also until the Leave-taking, and of the saint—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

