The 21st Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints, Demetrius, Metropolitan of Rostov, the Wonderworker

The Leave-Taking of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

As thou wast faithful in a little, O Demetrius, the Lord set thee over many; and thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord, where, standing before Him, thou prayest in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

Thou didst dedicate thy childhood to learning, thy youth to the struggles of monasticism, and thy manhood to the benefit of all; wherefore we all now honor thee among the saints. *Twice*

Glory…, in the same tone—

As thou didst forsake the world and all the beautiful things of the world, so didst thou forsake thy rule over the brethren, and didst make thine abode again in Kiev, nigh unto the cave, from whence by thy labors thou didst produce for us the pearl of the lives of the saints.

Now & ever…, idiomelon of the feast, in Tone VI—

Today is put forth from the impenetrable bosom of the earth the shoot of life, and it announceth the Resurrection of Christ Who was nailed thereto; and, lifted up by priestly hands, it proclaimeth His ascension to Heaven, whereby our nature, which was bound to the earth by the fall, doth now dwell in the heavens. Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry out: O Lord Who wast lifted up thereon and thereby raised us up with Thyself: vouchsafe us Thy heavenly joys, as Thou lovest mankind.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VIII—

Come, ye children of the Church of Russia, let us bless our teacher, who instructed us during his lifetime and edifieth us after his death, for he is honored as the good shepherd of our souls.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of heart shall be of understanding.

The great hierarch Demetrius, the divinely inspired instrument of the most Holy Spirit, the denouncer of vain-minded schisms, who poureth forth a stream of the grace of God from his much-healing relics, doth unceasingly mediate and pray to God for our souls.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Hearkening to the voice of the Lord calling thee to Himself, O Demetrius, thou wast prepared for thy departure from this life. Thou didst not slumber in the evening or at midnight, at daybreak or in the morning, waiting for the Lord to come to thee, until, meeting Him, thou didst enter unto Him in everlasting joy; and there, standing before Him, thou prayest that He grant us a life of holiness and a Christian end.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Rejoice, O Demetrius, thou boast of hierarchs, glory of priests, rule of monks and confirmation of the Church.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VI—

Today the Tree hath appeared! Today the Jewish race hath perished! Today the Faith is made manifest by faithful hierarchs. Adam fell because of a tree, but the demons are made to tremble again by the Tree. O almighty Lord, glory to Thee!

After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart…”, the troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, healer of Russia and new advocate before God: by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. O blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls may be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victory unto Orthodox Christians over their adversaries, preserving Thy community by Thy Cross.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 of the feast, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Raised on high, the Cross exhorteth all creation to hymn the all-pure Passion of Him Who was lifted up thereon. For thereon having slain him who slew us, in that He is merciful, He gave life unto the dead, and in the exceeding greatness of His goodness He hath made them beautiful and vouchsafed them to live in the heavens. Wherefore, rejoicing, we exalt His name, and magnify His extreme condescension. *Twice*

Moses prefigured Thee, stretching forth his arms on high, and vanquished the tyrant Amalek, O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, confirmation of sufferers, savior of all the venerable. Wherefore, creation, beholding thee lifted up, is gladdened, and keepeth festival, glorifying Christ, Who through thee hath gathered the dispersed in His extreme goodness.

O most precious Cross, who art today exalted, and about whom the ranks of angels stand in gladness, by divine command thou dost uplift all who for the stealing of the fruit were driven out and were sunk in death. Wherefore, we, the faithful, venerating thee with hearts and lips, derive from thee sanctification, crying out: Exalt ye Christ, the all-good God, and worship His divine footstool.

And 4 stichera of the saint—

*In the same tone:* On earth, O holy Demetrius, thou didst strive to make that which is baser subject to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit; wherefore, thou didst receive the archpastoral staff, wherewith thou didst shepherd well those who were right submissive, and didst drive far away the disobedient. And now thou standest in the heavens as a priest, joining chorus with the angels.

During thy lifetime, O holy hierarch Demetrius, thou didst gird thy loins with love, and, putting trust in Christ on thy feet as shoes, thou didst adorn the lamp of faith with the oil of good works; wherefore, thou hast entered into the bridal-chamber of heaven with the wise, where, standing before Christ the Master, do thou pray that, when the cry cometh at midnight, we may be ready to go forth to meet Him.

*In Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”:* Having adorned thy soul with the virtues, and finished the race of this transitory life in the fear of God, thou hast found grace before God, O holy Demetrius; and, standing now before the throne of the Lord, pray thou that our souls be saved.

O good shepherd, fervent emulator of the Good Shepherd, the Son of God: hearken to us sinners, who call thine unceasing mediation to our aid, and entreat the most merciful God in our behalf, that we may escape all evils and perils, and may receive eternal blessedness, O holy hierarch Demetrius, that with thee we may glorify and hymn the Holy Trinity.

Glory…, in the same tone—

With praises let us bless the holy hierarch Demetrius, the great bishop, the Chrysostom of Russia, who, having been made a chosen vessel of the most Holy Spirit, hath been shown to be a member of the choir of the friends of God! And he prayeth that peace and length of days be granted to all Orthodox Christians, victory and triumph over their enemies, might to their native lands, and great mercy to the world.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone II—

Come, all ye nations, let us worship the blessed Tree whereby everlasting righteousness hath come to be; for he who by the tree deceived our forefather Adam, is himself deceived by the Cross, and he who by tyranny held fast the royal house, falleth, cast down by a strange fall. By the blood of God the venom of the serpent is washed away, and the curse of the just condemnation was lifted by the Righteous One when He was condemned by an unjust sentence; for it was fitting that the tree be healed by a Tree, and that, by the sufferings of the Dispassionate One on the Tree, the sufferings of the condemned be loosed. Glory, O Christ our King, to Thy wise dispensation toward us, whereby Thou hast saved all, in that Thou art good and lovest mankind.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon.

When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the light, she is found preëminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.

At Litia, these stichera of the saint, in Tone V—

Come, ye councils of the Orthodox, let us hymn the holy hierarch who hath guided us to the knowledge of God by his teaching, the all wondrous wellspring of wonders, the all-radiant beacon of the Church, the all-wise teacher of Rostov, the all-beauteous adornment of all Russia; for he delivereth us from all evil temptations and misfortunes, and prayeth for our souls.

Thou didst tend the flock of the reason-endowed sheep of Christ well on the pasture of piety, O hierarch; wherefore, forsake not the children of thy Church after thy repose, but visit them; and, standing with the hierarchs before the Holy Trinity, pray that all be saved who with love honor the uncovering of thy precious relics, O all-praised Demetrius.

The Lord hath glorified thee with signs and wonders, O holy hierarch Demetrius; for thou drivest away evil spirits, healest the passions and enlightenest the souls of the faithful who have recourse to thy holy tomb, O converser with the angels, peer of the apostles, champion of ­Orthodoxy, who art equally enthroned with the hierarchs.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

The city hath been sanctified! The nations have been blessed! The Church of the firstborn joineth chorus in the spirit, O hierarch Demetrius, and the people cry out at the uncovering of thy precious relics: Thou art our confirmation, and in thee do we boast! Pray thou, that all who ever glorify the uncovering of thy holy relics with love may be saved.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone IV—

Moses, prefiguring the activity of the precious Cross, O Christ, vanquished Amalek his adversary in the wilderness of Sinai; for when he stretched out his arms, forming the image of the Cross, he strengthened the people. And now these events have found their fulfillment in us: today the Cross is elevated and the demons flee; today all creation is freed from corruption, for gifts have shone forth upon us because of the Cross. Wherefore, rejoicing, we all fall down before it, saying: Glory to Thee, O Lord, for Thy works are magnified!

At the aposticha, these stichera of the feast, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

*Automelon:* Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross, invincible victory of piety, gate of paradise, confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been destroyed and abolished, and the power of death hath been trampled down, and we have been raised up from earth to the heavens, O invincible weapon, opponent of the demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, grant the world great mercy.

*Stichos:* Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for it is holy.

*In the same melody:* Rejoice, O Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been released from the curse, thou ensign of joy, who in thine exaltation drivest away the enemy, O most honored one, our helper, dominion of kings, might of the righteous, splendor of priests, who, when traced, dost deliver from evils, staff of power, whereby we are shepherded, weapon of peace around whom the angels stand in fear, divine glory of Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy!

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Rejoice, O guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the dead, who hast lifted us up who have fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, whereby the curse hath been annulled and incorruption hath blossomed forth, and we mortals have been deified, and the devil hath been utterly cast down! Beholding thee today uplifted in the arms of the hierarch, we exalt Him Who was lifted up upon thee, and we bow down before thee, richly drawing forth great mercy.

Glory…, of the saint, in Tone IV—

Let us rejoice, ye councils of Russia, rendering praise and blessing to Demetrius, the wonderworker of Rostov; for he labored greatly for us in the writing of spiritually profitable books, whereby those who have wandered from the true path of piety are directed to the Truth, and the hearts of the Orthodox are made steadfast in the right Faith. To him let us cry aloud: O all-wise teacher, entreat Christ, that, instructed by thy doctrine, we may receive everlasting life.

Now & ever…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII—

That which Moses prefigured with his body of old cast down and vanquished Amalek; and David the psalmist, crying out, hath commanded us to bow down before Thy footstool, Thy precious Cross, O Christ God. Today we sinners also do homage with our unworthy lips to Thee Whose will it was to be nailed thereto; and, chanting, we pray: O Lord, vouchsafe that with the thief we may receive Thy kingdom!

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, healer of Russia and new advocate before God, by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. O blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls may be saved. *Twice*

And the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victory unto Orthodox Christians over their adversaries, preserving Thy community by Thy Cross. *Once*

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the saint; Now & ever…, that of the feast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VI—

No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted, O Christ our Lord, than the foundations of death were shaken. That which hades swallowed greedily it spewed forth, trembling. Thou hast revealed to us Thy salvation, O Holy One, and we glorify Thee. O Son of God, have mercy upon us!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

We bow down before the tree of Thy Cross, O Thou Who lovest mankind, for Thou wast nailed thereto, O Life of all. Thou didst open paradise to the thief who approached Thee with faith, O Savior, and he was vouchsafed sweetness for confessing Thee: “Remember me, O Lord!” Accept us like him, for we cry: We have all sinned! Disdain us not, for Thou art compassionate!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

Today the words of the prophet have been fulfilled! For, behold! we bow down before the place where Thy feet stood, O Lord, and, receiving the Tree of salvation, we have achieved liberation from sinful passions through the supplications of the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Of old, Joshua, the son of Nun, mystically prefigured the image of the Cross when he stretched forth his arms in the form of the Cross, O my Savior; and the sun stood still until he had cast down all the enemy opposed to Thee, O God. And now Thou hast raised with Thee the whole world, which saw Thee set upon the Cross, destroying the might of death.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father Demetrius, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou entreatest Christ God for us.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VII—

Like a palm-tree hast thou blossomed forth from the earth in incorruption, and like the cedar in Lebanon hast thou been multiplied in miracles; thou hast been exalted in revelation, standing like a city upon a mountaintop, and like a lamp hast shone forth in thy memory as from beneath a bushel. And all of us, beholding the things fulfilled in thee, glorify Him Who hath so magnified thee among His saints. As thou hast boldness before Christ the Lord, pray thou, O Demetrius manifest in holiness, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, in the same tone—

Now & ever…, sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically ­commanded…”—

Of old, in paradise, a tree stripped me naked, the enemy bringing about mortality through eating; but the tree of the Cross, bearing for men the vesture of life, hath been planted in the ground, and the whole world hath been filled with all manner of joy. Beholding it uplifted, O ye people, let us cry out to God together: Fill Thou Thy house with glory!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 35

from the midpoint \(Jn. 10: 1-8\)

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O holy hierarch Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant, who increased the talant entrusted to thee by thy Master: grace hath poured forth in thy lips, for with thy teachings thou hast adorned the Church, hast made plain the truth of Orthodoxy, and hast put the thoughts of the schismatics to shame. Wherefore, after thy departure, as during thy lifetime, strive thou that, convinced by thy miracles, the vain-minded may come to their senses and with us glorify God in three Hypostases.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Tracing an upright line with his staff, Moses divided the Red Sea for Israel, which was travelling on foot; and striking it a transverse blow, he brought the waters together over the chariots of Pharaoh, thereby inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

Upon a pole did Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.

The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of the saint, with 8 troparia, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Standing before the Holy Trinity with the angelic ranks, O great hierarch Demetrius, pray for us sinners, that we may receive the remission of our sins.

Having enslaved thy body to thy spirit by all manner of asceticism and abstinence, and achieved incorruption in the body, imparting a healing power to its essential clay, O holy father, teach us also not to serve mammon.

Tending the flock entrusted to thee by Christ, the Chief Shepherd, and driving the soul-destroying wolves away from the fold by thy divinely inspired teachings, O holy hierarch Demetrius, look down now and see that vain-minded schisms in nowise disturb the tranquillity of the Church. And entreat God Who loveth mankind, that, with one mouth and one heart, we may all praise His loving-kindness.

*Theotokion:* Understanding thee to be chosen and most pure, O most immaculate one, the Son of God became thy Son, and hath made children through grace those who honor thee as the Theotokos.

*Katavasia: The irmoi of the feast.*

Ode III

*Irmos:* The rod of Aaron is taken to be an image of the mystery, for by its budding forth it chose one priest over others; and for the Church, which before was barren, the Tree of the Cross hath now budded forth, for her might and confirmation.

The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hardhearted people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross is the might and confirmation.

When Christ’s all-pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Established firmly upon the rock of the Faith of Christ, thou wast firm in the confession of Orthodoxy, and didst unceasingly denounce the ungodly.

Thou didst not cease to call out for the lost sheep of the flock of Christ, reproving, entreating and counselling them, even though not all heeded thy voice.

The children of the Church who had remained unshaken within the bosom thereof didst thou encourage; and we, attending to thy teachings with sweetness, cry aloud: There is none more holy than our God!

*Theotokion:* O pure and most immaculate one, thou gavest birth unto Him Who delivereth men from disobedience and by His blood hath washed away the ancestral sin of Adam.

Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV—

O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly on the Cross, bestow Thy compassions upon the new community called after Thee, O Christ God; gladden by Thy power Orthodox Christians, granting them victory over all adversaries. May they have as an ally the invincible trophy, Thy weapon of peace.

*Ikos:* He Who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he to the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace.

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Emulating the holiness of the fathers of old, when thou wast eight years of age thou didst dedicate thy life to the service of God; wherefore, thou becamest a great monk, priest, teacher, and hierarch, and now a wonderworker and advocate for our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Rejoicing in thee, O thrice blessed and life-bestowing Cross, the people celebrate together with the immaterial choirs, the ranks of hierarchs reverently hymn thee, multitudes of monastics and fasters bow down before thee in adoration, and we all glorify Christ Who was crucified on thee.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Of old, Moses transformed with a tree the bitter springs in the desert, showing forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.

Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.

In a sacred manner did the people encamp in four divisions; and preceding in this fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation of their ranks.

Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens declared the glory of our God.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Nurtured from childhood in goodly learning, thou didst not turn the acuity of thy mind to vain-minded ideas, O holy hierarch Demetrius, but to the edification and confirmation of the Orthodox, and to the reproof and chastisement of the inveterate. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be a worthy successor of the throne of the apostles.

The healing shrine of thy relics poureth forth inexhaustible healing, and those who have recourse unto them with faith find deliverance from evils.

For the love which thou didst cherish for Christ and the saints thou hast been glorified with the gift of miracles and healings; wherefore, we bow down before thee and beseech thee as a favorite and friend of God, that thou remember us in thy holy prayers before Him.

*Theotokion:* Entreat God Who loveth mankind for us, O all-holy Mistress, that He remember not our iniquities, but rather that He deal with us according to His mercy.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O thrice-blessed Tree, whereon Christ, our King and Lord, was crucified, and whereby he who beguiled mankind by the tree did fall, when God was nailed in the flesh, Who granteth peace to our souls!

O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.

The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.

Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto the benighted gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

O holy hierarch of Christ, preserve thy homeland unassailed by the enemy, and grant victory and triumph over its adversaries to our civil authorities.

O Demetrius, favorite of God, protect us from all the machinations of the wicked devil, that we may traverse the path of this life without stumbling, in fulfillment of the commandments of God.

O father Demetrius, burn away the darkness of sin from the eyes of our souls, and enlighten us with the knowledge of the will of God, that we may finish our race well in the light of His commandments.

*Theotokion:* O immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to the true Light, shine upon us the light of divine knowledge, for our salvation.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his arms in the form of the Cross in the belly of the sea monster, Jonah clearly prefigured the saving passion. And issuing forth after three days, he foreshadowed the transcendent resurrection of Christ God, Who was nailed in the flesh and hath enlightened the world by His rising on the third day.

Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture which was written in shadows, and hath dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.

Divine Israel, laying his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the young, revealed that the people who hath the honor of being the elder is a slave to the law. Wherefore, when suspected of erring in so doing, he did not alter the life-bearing image, for, he said, protected by the Cross, the newly established people of Christ God surpass them.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

With the eye of thy compassion look upon the billows of sin which assail us, O holy hierarch of Christ, and guide our voyage to the calm haven of the loving-kindness of God.

O father Demetrius, be thou for us a good helmsman, and leave us not to perish in our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted therein as a man, help us who are tempted, O holy Demetrius, and be thou a helper and mediator for us before the greatly merciful God, that He lead our life up from corruption.

*Theotokion:* With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. Do thou, who hast reconciled the whole human race with God, deprive us not of thine aid.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Let us bless Demetrius, the golden-worded teacher, the star of Russia, who shone forth from Kiev, and through Novgorod Seversky reached Rostov, and hath illumined the whole land with his teachings and miracles; for he wrote down for all those things which are for our edification, that, like Paul, he might win all for Christ, and save our souls through the right Faith.

*Ikos:* It becometh the righteous in heaven to rejoice over the repentant, and us sinners on earth, to rejoice over thee, O righteous Demetrius; for we have acquired thee as a new advocate before God for us. And blessing Him with fitting praises, in joy we cry out thus: Rejoice, O boast of Rostov and praise of all Russia!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The mad command of the ungodly tyrant, breathing forth threats and blasphemy hateful to God, cast the people into confusion. Yet the three youths feared not the fury of the wild beasts, nor the raging blaze; but in the midst of the fire, when the dew-bearing wind blew upon it, they sang: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The first man, tasting of the tree, made his abode in corruption; for, having condemned himself by an inglorious rejection of life, he imparted a certain taint as a corruption to the whole race. But we mortals, gaining utterance through the tree of the Cross, cry out: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Disobedience violated the commandment of God, and the tree brought death to man by its being partaken of unseasonably, for, for the preservation of that which is most precious, the tree of life was forbidden; but God disclosed it to the hapless thief who cried out rightly: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry out with faith: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

For the sake of the humility of Christ, thou wast shown to be a model of humility, O holy Demetrius. Grant that I may cry out, not in pride, but in humility: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Through abstinence thou didst make thy body subject to thy spirit, O holy hierarch Demetrius. Grant that I may live in abstinence, that I may cry aloud with undefiled lips: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

By thy teachings, O father Demetrius, thou directest our thoughts; and, emulating thee, we chant unto God: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, Thou didst conceive in thy womb the unoriginate God, Whom we hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O children, equal in number to the Trinity, bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word, Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who imparteth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood of God the Word incarnate, celebrating the restoration of those on earth. Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, whereby the resurrection of the world is accomplished forever!

O ye mortal stewards of grace, in sacred manner raise on high with your hands the Cross whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him forever!

O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for thereby tribes of warriors seeking courage are scattered abroad forever.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt ­supremely for all ages!

Thou art our good teacher, O father Demetrius, crying out to all who heed thy teaching: Exalt Christ supremely forever!

O divinely wise hierarch, most blessed Demetrius, by thy supplication and thy philanthropic love for us entreat God Who loveth mankind in our behalf, for we exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Thou didst overturn the wickedly harmful reasoning of the vain-minded, O holy Demetrius, and didst instruct the faithful to remain steadfast in the true Faith, crying out: Exalt Christ supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, we piously hymn thy supernatural and wondrous birthgiving, exalting Christ supremely forever.

We do not sing the Magnificat before Ode IX, but chant instead the refrain of the feast—

Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!

Then we chant the irmos of Canon I: “O Theotokos, thou art a mystical garden…” The second choir likewise chanteth the refrain and the irmos. The refrain is chanted before each of the 6 troparia of Canon I.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou art a mystical garden of paradise, which, untilled, didst put forth Christ, by Whom the life-bearing Tree of the Cross was planted. Wherefore, ­worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee.

Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him Who planted them in the beginning—Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Then the refrain of Canon II—

Magnify, O my soul, the exaltation of the life-creating Cross of the Lord!

And the irmos of Canon II: “Death, which came upon our race…” The second choir likewise chanteth the refrain and the irmos.

The refrain is chanted before each of the 6 troparia of Canon II.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Death, which came upon our race through the eating of the tree hath been abolished by the Cross today; for the curse of our first mother, which fell upon us all, hath been annulled through the Offspring of the pure Mother of God, whom all the hosts of heaven magnify.

Thou didst not permit the murderous bitterness of the tree still to remain, O Lord, for thou didst utterly destroy it by the Cross. Wherefore, by a tree Thou didst once sweeten the bitterness of the waters of Marah, prefiguring the activity of the Cross, which all the hosts of heaven magnify.

Those who are continually sunk in the darkness of our forefather, Thou hast raised up by the Cross today, O Lord; for though our nature was brought low through deceit and great lack of restraint, the light of Thy Cross hath again guided all of us aright, which we, the faithful, magnify.

That Thou mightest show forth to the world the image of the Cross venerated among all, O Lord, Thou didst trace its outline in the heavens, in that it is all-glorious, radiant with boundless light: the invincible weapon for the emperor. Wherefore, all the hosts of heaven magnify Thee.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Enjoying the everlasting life for which thou didst diligently struggle, O father, pray thou that we also may attain unto it.

Even though thou hast passed from us to the heavens, O holy hierarch Demetrius, yet dost thou abide in spirit with those who call upon thee, teaching and strengthening them, that they may tread the path of the saving commandments of God.

Thou hast been shown to be a most radiant beacon of piety, a most excellent rhetor, and the adornment of Orthodox hierarchs. Wherefore, as is meet, we magnify thee with heartfelt love.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, with the holy hierarch Demetrius beseech God, Who loveth mankind, Whom thou didst bear, that He save our souls.

*Katavasia:* The irmoi of both canons, with their refrains. And a prostration.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “When the disciples…”—

The Cross is the guardian of the whole world! The Cross is the beauty of the Church! The Cross is the dominion of kings! The Cross is the confirmation of the faithful! The Cross is the glory of the angels and the wounding of the demons! *Twice*

Glory…, exapostilarion of the saint—

O our God, Who settest the bounds of the nations according to the number of Thine angels, and assemblest Thy Church from the scattered children of Adam, Thou dost therein multiply Thy saints like the stars in heaven, among which the memory of Thy holy hierarch Demetrius hath shone forth. For his sake enlighten souls darkened by schismatic vain-mindedness, that together we may cry out to Thee the threefold hymn: Alleluia!

Now & ever…, another exapostilarion of the feast Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Today is the Cross raised on high, and the world is sanctified; for He that sitteth with the Father and the Holy Spirit stretched out his arms thereon. It hath brought the whole world to the knowledge of Thee, O Christ. Therefore, to those who hope in Thee do Thou vouchsafe divine glory.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII—

*Automelon:* O all-glorious wonder! the Life-bearing Tree, the all-holy Cross is revealed today, lifted up on high. All the ends of the earth glorify it, and the hordes of the demons are affrighted. O what a gift hath been given to mortals! Thereby, O Christ, save Thou our souls, in that Thou alone art compassionate.

*In the same melody:* O all-glorious wonder! The Cross which bore the Most High like a cluster of grapes full of life is seen today lifted up from the earth. Thereby have we all been drawn to God, and death hath been utterly slain. O the all-precious Tree whereby we have received the food of immortality in Eden, glorifying Christ!

O all-glorious wonder! The length and height of the Cross is equal to heaven! For it sanctifieth all things with grace divine. In it are the barbarian nations vanquished. In it are the scepters of kings made firm. O divine ladder, whereby we ascend to the heavens, exalting Christ the Lord in hymns!

And 3 of the saint, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

From thy youth thou didst wholly take upon thyself the search for wisdom and the fear of God, which having found thou didst not hide in the earth, like the slothful servant; but teaching and laboring for Him Who gave thee the talant, thou didst increase it an hundredfold, and becamest a great merchant, elucidating the Old and New Testaments, and disclosing the depths of the meaning of the divinely written books: and thou hast taught us also to conduct such goodly trade. Wherefore, O Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant of God, for such treasures which thou hast revealed unto us thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord. *Twice*

Thou didst bind thy holy mind to the obedience of faith, that thou mightest adorn it with good works; hence thou hast been shown to be a skillful husbandman of the vineyard of Christ. For every branch which produced not fruit thou didst cut off by the fear of the Lord, and therein thou didst preserve piety alone, which thou didst hedge round about with the dogmas of the Church, and which thou didst strengthen within by the tower of Orthodoxy, wholly filling the wine-vats thereof with thy teachings. Wherefore, O holy Demetrius who loved the works of faith, visit now the vineyard which the right hand of the Most High hath planted, that it may produce the grapes of salvation.

Glory…, of the saint, in the same tone—

Sing unto the Lord a new song, O Russia! Praise thy God, O city of Rostov! For the Most High hath been well-pleased to give us the new wonderworker Demetrius, to whom witness is borne by all and by the truth itself. And honoring his memory among the saints, let us, elders and the young, praise and magnify our God, Who hath granted His favored one to shine forth upon us in holy incorruption and the working of miracles.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the Tone VI—

Today the Cross of the Lord cometh forth; and the faithful receive it with desire, and they derive healings of soul and body, and every pang. Let us venerate it with joy and fear: with fear, for we are unworthy because of our sins; and with joy, because of the salvation which is granted to the world by Christ God, Who hath great mercy, and Who was nailed to it.

Great Doxology. Troparion of the saint; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IX of the canon of the feast; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon of the feast, and this prokimenon of the saint, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318

\(Heb. 7: 27-8: 2\)

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: we have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia of the feast, and that of the saint, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \(Jn. 10: 9-16\)

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

Communion verse of the feast, and that of the saint—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

