The 21st Day of the Month of September

Leave-taking of the Exaltation of the Precious Cross

At Vespers

After the usual kathisma, on “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera of the Cross; Glory…, Now & ever…, the festal Doxasticon. \(If it be Saturday evening: Glory…, the Doxasticon of the feast; Now and ever…, the Dogmaticon of the current tone.\) On the aposticha, the stichera of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…, the Doxasticon of the feast. After “Our Father”, the troparion of the feast. Dismissal.

At Compline

Kontakion of the feast.

At Nocturns

We chant the usual troparia.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, *thrice*. After the kathismata, the sessional hymns of the feast. Canon of the feast, with 12 troparia. The Irmos is chanted *twice*. The same irmoi are chanted as katavasiae, both choirs together. After Ode III, sessional hymns of the feast, *twice*. After Ode VI, kontakion and ikos of the feast. At Ode IX, we do not chant the Magnificat. Canon I, with 8 troparia, and Canon II with 6 troparia. The irmoi of Ode IX of both canons are chanted *twice*. Katavasiae: The irmos of Canon I with its refrain, followed by the irmos of Canon II with its refrain. Prostration. Exapostilarion of the feast, *twice*. On the Praises, 4 stichera of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…, doxasticon of the feast. Great Doxology. After “Our Father”, the troparion of the feast. Litanies and dismissal.

On the Hours

Troparion and kontakion of the feast.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Ode IX of both canons. After the Entrance, the troparion of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…, the kontakion of the feast. Prokimenon, Alleluia and Communion Verse of the feast. Epistle and Gospel of the day. After the dismissal of the Liturgy, the priest, bearing a censer, and the deacon, bearing a candle, go forth and cense the precious Cross; and the priest beareth it into the sanctuary on his head, on a tray, through the royal doors. The deacon precedeth him with the candle, censing the precious Cross. The Cross is then placed upon the holy table, where it is censed in cross-wise fashion. Thus do we take leave of the precious Cross.

Be it known: If the Leave-taking of the Exaltation of the Precious Cross fall on a Sunday:

At Little Vespers,

on Saturday Evening

On “Lord, I have cried…”, the resurrection stichera. At the Aposticha, one sticheron of the resurrection, and the aposticha stichera from Great Vespers of the feast, with their stichoi; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. Troparion of the resurrection; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast.

At Great Vespers

After the usual kathisma, on “Lord, I have cried…”, 10 stichera: 4 of the resurrection, and 6 of the feast, from those chanted on the feast itself; Glory…, Doxasticon of the feast; Now & ever…, Dogmaticon of the current tone. At Litia, the stichera and Doxasticon of the feast. On the Aposticha, the resurrectional stichera; Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast. After the blessing of the loaves, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, *twice*; and the troparion of the feast, *once*.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the resurrection, *twice*; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. After the kathismata, the sessional hymns of the resurrection, and their theotokia. “Blessed art Thou, O Lord… The council of the angels was amazed…”, and the hypacoi of the tone. Hymns of ascent and prokimenon of the tone of the week. “Let every breath…” Gospel of the resurrection. “Having beheld the resurrection of Christ…” Psalm 50 and the rest as usual. Canons: Resurrection, with 4 troparia; Theotokos, with 2 troparia; and that of the feast, with 8 troparia. *Katavasia:* the irmoi of the feast. After Ode III, the kontakion and ikos of the feast; sessional hymn of the feast, *twice*. After Ode VI, the resurrectional kontakion and ikos. At Ode IX, we chant the Magnificat. Resurrectional exapostilarion; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. On the Praises, 8 stichera: 4 of the resurrection, and 4 of the feast, including the doxasticon, with the festal stichoi; Glory…, the evangelical sticheron; Now & ever… “All-blessed art thou,…” Great Doxology. After “Our Father”, the matins resurrectional troparion only. Litanies and Dismissal. First Hour and final Dismissal.

On the Hours

Troparia of the resurrection and the feast at each Hour. After “Our Father”, we alternate the festal and resurrectional kontakia.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 10 troparia: 6 of the resurrection, and 4 from Ode IX of the festal canon.

After the Little Entrance: Troparia of the resurrection and the feast; Glory…, kontakion of the resurrection; Now & ever…, kontakion of the feast.

Prokimena of the day and of the feast. Epistle and Gospel of the Sunday after the Exaltation of the Cross, and of the day.

Alleluia and Communion Verse of the feast and of the day.

