The 22nd Day of the Month of September

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Phocas,

Bishop of Sinope

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Codratus,

Whose Feast is Transferred to this Day from the 21st of September

because of the Apodosis of the Exaltation of the Precious Cross.

Commemoration of the Prophet Jonah, and of The Venerable Jonah, Father of Saints Theodore and Theophanes the Branded

For this day we provide also the service for the Martyrs of Zographou; and as well, on the Saturday on or after this date, the Commemoration of the Holy Fathers of the Near Caves of Kiev

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” six stichera; three to the Apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

O glorious Codratus, as a sacred hierarch, as a divine preacher, as a divinely chosen witness of the sufferings of Christ, and a co-heir of the ineffable glory which is to be revealed, thou didst most wisely preach the sacred Gospel, O most sacred one, and with light hast guided those who are in the darkness of ignorance. Wherefore, joyously keeping festival, we honor thy most sacred and holy memory, O blessed God-bearer.

Having most gloriously been taught divine things, like the sun didst thou traverse the earth in the lightning flashes of thy preaching, O initiate of the sacred mysteries, and didst enlighten the souls of those who were in darkness, and thus didst drive away the prince of darkness and his terrible demons, who could not endure the radiance, or the divine grace, or the all-accomplishing activity of the Spirit which dwelt within thee, O sacred hierarch Codratus, blessed intercessor for those who praise thee.

Strengthened by thy confession of God, adorned with the beauties of wounds, driven from thine Athenian flock by wicked men, O most blessed one, like a saving spring didst thou water the earth and didst show forth as fertile hearts that before were frozen by the darkness of vanity, in that thou art an apostle and a disciple of Christ, O sacred hierarch Codratus most true, thou supplicant in behalf of those who praise thee.

And three stichera to the Hieromartyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

Having cast down the vanity of idols by thy sacred discourse, thou didst make steadfast unstable hearts by faith and didst guide them to life, O hierarch. And having suffered under the law, thou didst become a martyr of the Lord, O Phocas.

Having dyed thy sacred vesture in the blood of thy sacred body, O most sacred father, thou didst truly receive from Christ a twofold crown, most blessed one, and with the angels dost thou hold chorus in the heavens, praying that we be saved.

Thou dost illumine the whole world with the rays of thy miracles, O father; thou dost ever help those who are at sea, and dost dispel the carnal weakness of every soul, having received grace from the Lord, O divinely blessed martyr Phocas.

Glory..., in Tone IV, the composition of Cyprian the Studite—

From thy childhood thou didst love the Lord, O most blessed Phocas, wise hieromartyr, for, taking the weapon of the Cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst unwaveringly travel the path of salvation, and by Him wast thou shown to be one who dwelleth with the angels, an opponent of the demons, and a most radiant intercessor for the world.

Now and ever..., Theotokion; or, if it be Wednesday or Friday, this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

O Mother, beholding Me hanging upon the Tree, thy Son and God, Who fixed the earth immovably upon the waters and fashioned all creation, do not lament Me, for I shall arise and be glorified, and with might shall I lay waste to the kingdom of hell; I shall destroy its power, and its prisoners shall I deliver from the wickedness thereof, in that I am compassionate; and I shall lead them to My Father, for I love mankind.

The Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos.

Troparion of the Apostle, in Tone III—

O holy apostle Codratus, entreat thou the ­merciful God, that He grant to our souls remission of sins.

Glory..., that of the Hieromartyr, in Tone IV—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the faith even unto the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Phocas. Entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.

At Compline

The Service of the Holy Prophet Jonah,

and of the Venerable Jonah, the Father of Saints Theodore & Theophanes the Branded,

The canon, the acrostic whereof is “I sing the glory of Thy prophet, O Christ”, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Of the Prophet

Preserving the dignity of thy soul, O blessed Jonah, thou wast an image of godly aspect, and wast vouchsafed to prefigure the resurrection of Christ which transcendeth the world, which we all hymn, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

In every way wast thou with love inclined toward God, O ever-memorable one; and illumined with His splendors, thou wast made a clarion-voiced prophet to the nations by Him, teaching the saving remedy of repentance.

Of the Venerable One

A servant of God, O father, as a priest thou didst keep the commandments of the Savior; for thou didst forsake the tumult of the world, taking up thy cross, O most blessed one, and didst follow in His life-bearing footsteps.

O mediator of salvation who didst possess divinely inspired understanding, thou didst piously go through all the Scriptures, absorbing the divinely proclaimed precepts, O venerable father Jonah, and hence received the dignity of the priesthood.

*Theotokion:* The Sun Who shone forth invisibly from the Father before time began, shone forth from thee, O Ever-virgin Mary; and all-gloriously circumscribed in the body for us who are visible, He hath enlightened men with the radiance of piety.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and non righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Of the Prophet

Foreseeing the grace which by divine power would be borne over to the gentiles, the prophet was brought down into the abyss of despair, crying out to thee, O Master: Thou art our God, and there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having spoken piety to the sailors and called thyself the servant of the Most High, thou wast cast into the deep, O glorious prophet, crying out: Thou art our God, and there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Of the Venerable One

Accepting the words of praise now woven by us, O God-bearer, rejoicing thou enjoyest the fruits of thy labors, and criest out: Thou art our God, and there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Hearkening to the words of the Master, thou didst forsake the world and that which is in the world, and didst lead thine offspring to the Lord, O venerable one, crying out: Thou art our God, and there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou alone of all from ages past hast been vouchsafed great things in manner transcending nature; for in thy womb thou didst bear and give flesh unto God Whom all creation cannot contain. Wherefore, we all honor thee as the Theotokos.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Of the Prophet

Unable to endure the sight of the apostasy of thy people, O divinely eloquent Jonah, thou didst prefer to flee, and wast swallowed up by a sea monster, O blessed one, prefiguring the three-day burial of Christ.

Knowing the Master Who loveth mankind, thou couldst not bear to see the gifts of prophecy ridiculed; wherefore, fleeing, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst ignore the command of God.

Of the Venerable One

Emulating Abraham, O divinely wise and venerable Jonah, thou didst open thy doors to all in need; wherefore, Christ openeth the gates of heaven unto thee, O most blessed one.

Thou didst adorn the most honorable priestly dignity, O blessed Jonah, and, rejoicing, didst hasten to the assemblies of monastics, leading all thy household with thee, O all-blessed one

*Theotokion:* Healing the ancient crime of Eve, the All-blessed One, taking on my whole form, made His abode in thee, the most immaculate and most holy one.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Of the Prophet

The great Prophet Jonah was a prefigurement of Thy three-day burial in the rock-hewn tomb, O Christ the Word, whereby Thou hast saved those who cry out to Thee with faith and love: We know none other God that Thee!

Unable to ignore the Ninevites who lay in the pit of sin, O my Christ, taking pity, O Master, Thou didst send to them the Prophet Jonah as a herald manifestly announcing repentance.

Of the Venerable One

Illumined with a life of Christ-like beauty, O blessed Jonah, thou wast shown to all as an honorable man, for thou didst truly know how glorious are those who accomplish such virtue, in that thou wast shown to be a right acceptable priest of Christ.

Strengthened by divine power, O blessed one, thou didst mightily reject the love of the world, and rejoicing didst by the will of thy character come to the Master; and having preserved the Faith unadulterated, O divinely wise one, thou hast received a crown of glory.

*Theotokion:* O only blessed one, thou didst ineffably give birth for us to the One visible in two Hypostases in two essences: God, the Word of God, Who became incarnate in His ineffable mercy. Him do thou entreat, that they who hymn thee may be kept safe.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Of the Prophet

As thou didst save Jonah from the sea monster, O Savior, keeping him safe in manner past understanding, so no save my soul from the snares of the serpent.

O prophet, thou wast a mediator of salvation for the Ninevites, who believed on thy preaching, O glorious one who proclaimed repentance.

Of the Venerable One

Knowing the transience of the things of life, and forsaking them, O father, thou didst strive for reward of a portion on high, O thou who art most rich.

Piously nurturing multitudes of monastics, thou didst not forsake them, O blessed father; wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed higher delight in the mansions of heaven.

*Theotokion:* Without knowing man thou gavest birth, O all-pure Virgin, and thou remainest a virgin eternally, revealing the true divinity of thy Son and God through prefigurations.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before…”—

As a prophet of the coming of Christ, O blessed one, spending three days unharmed in the belly of the sea monster thou didst proclaim beforehand His resurrection on the third day, crying out: Now doth my life go up from corruption, unto Thee Who desirest to deliver mortals from corruption.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Of the Prophet

Unable to endure seeing thee weighed down by sorrow and grief, O most honored prophet, He Who is blessed and all-glorious straightway and all-glorious spread a shadow over thee who hadst grown faint.

From childhood thou wast consecrated to thy Creator, O most laudable, all-blessed and divinely wise Jonah; for as the offspring of prayer thou wast vouchsafed to receive the grace of prophecy from the Spirit, O thou who art most rich.

Of the Venerable One

As a priest, O venerable father Jonah, thou wast adorned with the election of judgment; wherefore, thou didst enter into the sanctuary of the church, beholding its innermost parts, and harvesting the fruit of thy sacred activity.

Thou didst love the ranks of the fathers, and wast joyfully glorified among their choirs. Standing before Christ, O most blessed and venerable one, thou receivest the full reward of thy ministry.

*Theotokion:* The Virgin, a cloud, gavest birth to the Sun of righteousness, remaining a virgin; and Thou, O Christ, having taken on the coarseness of the flesh, becamest man. Her do we hymn as the all-glorious one.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Of the Prophet

Stretching forth thy hands within the beast, as within a bridal-chamber, O divinely eloquent Jonah, thou didst cry out to God Who seest all things, saying: “O my Savior, lead my up from corruption, that my life may now again ascend unto Thee!”

Having purified thy soul’s mind of defilement, thou didst mingle it with that which thou desired, O blessed one; and, deified by divine understanding, thou becamest godly, chanting: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Of the Venerable One

Thou didst desire Christ with a pure and perfect love, O father, initiate of the sacred mysteries, and thou didst unceasingly cry out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Forsaking the beauty of this world, O blessed one, thou didst willingly go to Christ, desiring to behold His majesty; and abiding in the holy habitations, thou dost exalt Christ supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* With most sacred voices the most sacred prophets of God manifestly proclaimed thee, O pure one, to be the future Mother of Him Who hath dominion over all, O all-pure one. Him do we exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Of the Prophet

Illumined with rays of grace, thou wast a prefigurement of Christ, O divinely revealed Jonah; wherefore, piously delighting in thy most wise teachings, we all praise thee as a prophet, O right wondrous one.

With divine songs we most piously hymn thee, O blessed one, as him who manifested a prefigurement of the burial and resurrection of Christ, and who in manner past understanding becamest a sign which we enjoy through thy mediations, O thou who pleased God.

Of the Venerable One

Having from childhood magnificently absorbed the Orthodox understanding of the Son Who shone forth from the Father before time began, and the equally worshiped spirit Who ineffably proceedeth from the Father, as a priest thou didst clearly explain this, O venerable one.

The Creator caused thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven, in that thou wast an honored ministry of His Mysteries, O God-bearing father Jonah; and now thou lookest down upon us, thy children who ever praise thee, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* In manner past understanding thou was a bridal-chamber of the incarnation of the Word, O Virgin Theotokos, arrayed and adorned in the glory of the virtues; wherefore, we magnify thee as the most immaculate Theotokos.

And these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Illumined by the radiance of the three-Sunned Godhead, O Jonah who art most rich, as a prophet of God thou didst manifestly receive the gift of prophecy with a pure heart, didst foretell things to come and spewn forth by the beast without having suffered corruption, thou didst depict beforehand the resurrection of the Word on the third day.

Foreseeing the Master’s salvific overshadowing of the nations, O blessed and wise one, thou fleest from the face of the King of all, concealing the divine preaching of the saved; and thou wast cast to the sea monster, which in nowise destroyed thee, and wast vomited up upon dry land at the behest of God.

Depicting the resurrection of Christ on the third day, thou didst issue forth from the sea monster on the third day, O blessed Jonah; and for three days thou didst cry out, committing Nineveh to utter destruction; but seeing that what thou didst preach did not come to pass because of that city’s repentance, thou becamest despondent, marvelling at God’s love for mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having given birth to the most just Judge, O pure and most immaculate Mistress, entreat Him, that at the dread judgment which is to come He not condemn me who have lived prodigally, am condemned and at a loss, but that in His mercy and great goodness He join me unto the elect who will stand at His right hand.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Christ dying and slaying the deceiver, weeping, the most pure Mistress hymned Him as Master, Who had issued forth from her womb; and marvelling at His long-suffering, she cried: “O most beloved Child, forget not thy servants, and touch not my consolation, O Thou Who lovest mankind.”

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon to the Apostle, in Tone II, the acrostic whereof is: “For thee do I weave praise, O great Codratus.”—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Bearing thy crown and standing before the King of hosts, entreat Him to enlighten those who radiantly celebrate this thy memorial, O blessed apostle.

Building on the foundation of the Faith, O thou fullness of the pious, with thy teachings most mighty thou didst overthrow all the falsehood of idolatry.

Ministering the sacred Gospel with thy most sacred words, thou didst consecrate souls to thy Creator through faith and the strength of the Spirit, O ever-memorable Codratus.

*Theotokion:* The Fashioner of creation, born in the flesh of a Maiden who knew not wedlock, after her birthgiving preserved her a Virgin as she was before giving birth, as He was well-pleased so to do.

Canon to the Hieromartyr, in Tone IV, the acrostic whereof is: “May God grant me the gift of hymning thee, O Phocas,” the composition of Joseph—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Enlighten thou with the luminous rays of the Spirit the soul of me who today propose to hymn thy divine memory, O glorious one, who art shown to be a pastor and a beholder of the Ruler of all.

Thou didst splendidly enrich the godly glory of the martyrs, adorning thyself with pastoral beauty and dyeing thy vesture in the blood of thy sacred suffering, O divinely blessed one.

Making thy thought firm with hopes of that which is better, O most wise one, thou didst utterly paralyze him who is mighty in wickedness, and, a victor most renowned, thou didst ascend with haste to the heavens, O Phocas.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, the proscription of our ancestors hath been rescinded, for thou givest birth unto the preëternal God, Who revealeth Himself as a little Babe and truly fashioneth all the essence of humanity anew.

Ode III

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Working awesome wonders, O Codratus, thou didst lead unbelievers to the divine faith, as a God-pleasing apostle and honored hierarch, O most sacred one.

With divine teachings didst thou enlighten many, for thou didst show thyself to be a servant of the Light, illumining the ends of the earth with divine radiance, O sacred hierarch Codratus.

For thy flock wast thou a mediator of the greatest of blessings, rescuing it from the darkness of unbelief and enlightening it with displays of most glorious miracles.

*Theotokion:* Unbearable Fire dwelt within thee without consuming thy womb, O Theotokos, and hath burned up our passions and reduced the filth of deception to ashes.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Accomplishing healings through the evocation of Christ, O venerable one, thou didst save a city and people from the deceit of the enemy by the grace of God.

Being a temple of God, thou didst cast down temples of idols, O martyr, possessed of the all-accomplishing power of a helper and fellow worker.

O Phocas, an army of angels and the infinite light of God became visible when the Lord glorified thee before the judges’ seats.

*Theotokion:* Taking flesh of thee, God united Himself to men in His loving-kindness, and annulled the curse, O thou that alone art the all-blessed Mistress.

Kontakion of the Hieromartyr, in Tone VI—

As a hierarch who offered sacrifice, O father, thou didst ultimately offer thyself as a living sacrifice, bearing witness under the law concerning Christ God, strengthened by angels, assenting to death, O thou who art with those who cry to thee: Come thou with us, O Phocas, and no one shall be against us!

*Ikos:* O ye who desire to live in the heavens, treading pleasure underfoot on earth, let us cleanse our lips and purify our tongues for hymnody and praise, that we may fittingly fashion such for the hierarch Phocas; for, having arrived at the gates of heaven, he obtained entrance without hindrance to that which is beyond, and doth behold the Desired One, Who is glorified by the angels. Hence, he is able to move to compassion Him Who alone is compassionate, that He grant us healing of spiritual infirmities, in that he bore witness concerning Him. Therefore, let us sing to him and cry out: Come thou with us, O Phocas, and no one shall be against us!

Sessional hymn of the Apostle, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “The beauty of thy virginity...”—

O Codratus, thou didst preach the Word Who is wholly without beginning, Who was incarnate in manner surpassing understanding, Him Who is more comely in beauty than the children of men. Thus, as a godly hierarch, thou didst enlighten those who are in darkness, becoming light to the gentiles. Wherefore, keeping thy splendid festival in faith, we hymn thee.

Glory..., to the Hieromartyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy grave, O Savior...”—

Thou hast been sacredly glorified as a martyr and pastor, and, having empurpled thy priestly vesture with blood, thou now dost stand before the Lord. Wherefore, today the Church of God doth celebrate thy most glorious memory, O most blessed Phocas.

Now and ever..., Theotokion:—

O all-holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians: God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner transcending comprehension and recounting, do thou unceasingly entreat, with the hosts on high, that He grant remission of sins and correction of life unto all of us, who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Or this Stavrotheotokion:—

O Christ, the all-immaculate Mother, beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, cried out: O my Son, Who art with the Father and the Holy Spirit art equally without beginning, what is this unutterable dispensation, whereby Thou hast saved the work of Thine all-pure hands, O Compassionate One?

Ode IV

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Working in the field of the heart with the sickle of thy words, thou hast cut down all the thorns of malice.

Thy tomb gusheth forth gifts of healing upon all of us who praise thee, O sacred Codratus.

Mercifully inclining thine ear, O sacred Codratus, thou dost rescue from odious misfortunes those who entreat thee.

Illumining with the lamps of thy words those who were benighted in deception, thou didst consume all the underbrush of deceit.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, the Creator was incarnate of thy pure blood and hath renewed all that had been subject to corruption.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

On the summit of the Church hath the Master set thee, O Phocas, as a most radiant star enlightening all hearts with the rays of thy sufferings and wonders, O most sacred one.

Confessing the Master’s incarnation before the tyrant’s tribunal, O martyred passion-bearer, thou didst splendidly put to shame the idols of the Greeks and the godlessness of polytheism.

The sea of deception harrowed by the storm of polytheism didst thou traverse with divine guidance, O glorious one; and thou hast become a haven most calm for all that sail.

*Theotokion:* O blessed Virgin, who knewest not wedlock, boast of hierarchs and crown of all passion-bearers: from misfortunes and sorrows do thou deliver those who hymn thee.

Ode V

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

The most pure God, finding thy pure soul and abode of His glory, through thee cleanseth souls which have been defiled by grievous falls into sins.

The sage Greeks, compelled by thy wise dogmas, were prevailed upon, O blessed one, to confess Christ the Creator, the Wisdom and Power of the unoriginate Father.

Sacredly proclaiming the Radiance which cometh down from the Father of lights upon men, O Codratus, thou didst enlighten the people to honor and glorify the indivisible Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst give birth without seed to a Son Who was incarnate for us in two natures and Who was born timelessly of the Father before all ages, O pure one, for He alone is supreme.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Thou didst manifestly trip the steps of the enemy, directing thine own feet to the paths of divine desire, O most sacred one.

Thy much suffering body, pierced with wounds, tore off the members of godlessness with divine strength, O divinely blessed Phocas.

As a wholeburnt offering didst thou bring thyself to God Who offered Himself up for our sake and hath put an end to the bloody sacrifices of idolatry, O all-praised one.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, the Wisdom of God fashioned a temple for Himself of thy pure blood, for so He was well-pleased to do.

Ode VI

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou wast a lofty heaven proclaiming the saving glory of God, in that thou wast a divine hierarch and a glorious apostle, O Codratus.

Preaching the one unoriginate Being and the one dominion of the Godhead, O Codratus most wise, thou didst destroy the dark madness of polytheism.

O blessed and most sacred one, thy body which now, under the law of nature, lieth in the tomb, worketh most glorious things in manner transcending nature, O ever-memorable Codratus.

*Theotokion:* He Who stretched out heaven according to His will hath shown thee to be another heaven, one on earth, O Mistress Theotokos, and through thee He hath enlightened those who are in darkness.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Thou didst dry up the sea of godlessness, O most wise one, gushing forth venerable teaching as a wellspring of life; and now thou dost wash away all the stench of the passions with showers of miracles.

Despitefully used, thou wast broken and dismembered upon a tree, O sacred hierarch, but a voice strengthening thee from on high didst thou hear, O much-suffering martyr.

Having emulated the sufferings of the Dispassionate One, O Phocas, thou dost heal divers sufferings and dost deliver those who sail through storm and wave by thy divine prayers unto God.

*Theotokion:* Like a shower was the saving Word poured forth in thine incorrupt womb, O most holy Maiden, and with power divine He hath dried up the streams of wickedness.

Kontakion of the Apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “As first fruits...”—

O Lord, the world offereth Thee the Apostle Codratus as an honored and sacred hierarch and a most steadfast athlete; and with hymns it honoreth his precious memory, ever begging that remission of transgressions thus be given unto those who hymn him, O Compassionate One.

*Ikos:* Let us honor the wise hierarch as a faithful pastor and teacher, for in the meadow of suffering he hath put forth a most sacred rose and perfumed us, the faithful, having filled the whole world with the radiance of healing and enlightenment, with rays of miracles and virtuous works, for God hath made him wondrous for all that honor his precious memory with hymns, in that He is compassionate.

Ode VII

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having elevated thy mind to the Primal Good, thou didst become a temple of the Trinity most divine in appearance, and by thy most exalted teachings thou hast raised up those who are in the abyss of misery and that cry: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having demolished the temples of idols with the levers of thy prayers, thou didst raise up temples of God through the divine Spirit, O most sacred father, and didst lead in multitudes of the saved who cried: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Being fiery, as thou didst ever have within thy heart the divine fire of the Spirit, O most wise one, thou hast been seen to be a torch consuming all the underbrush of deception and enlightening those who cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thee from the curse of our first parents, O divinely joyous one, we know thee to be the cause of good, in that thou didst give birth to the Word, the Cause of all, in manner surpassing all understanding and wonder; and we cry out to thee, O most pure and blessed one, who bore God in the flesh.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou didst not fear the fury of the tormentors, O glorious one, but, presiding over thy reason-endowed flock, thou didst offer thyself as a lamb to Christ, the Chief Shepherd, O Phocas, who art glorified in martyrdom.

Thou wast tried like gold in a crucible, O martyr, cast into the midst of fiery lime, yet in no wise consumed, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord my God, in the temple of Thy glory!

With a divine dew, divine love, which consumed thy heart, preserved unconsumed in the fire thee that burnest up the filth of godlessness, O glorious hierarch.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Maiden, who by thy birthgiving hast renewed all humanity, in that thou art good, renew the putrid house of my soul with examples of repentance.

Ode VIII

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having the pillars of thy soul founded upon the noetic Stone, thou didst cause the enemies of the Lord to stumble, O blessed Codratus, and thou didst make steadfast all that hymn and supremely exalt Christ for all ages.

Having a heart and soul adorned with the virtues, thou hast adorned souls with the word of thy teaching, delivering all from the chaos of all idolatrous madness, O divinely eloquent Codratus.

As a disciple of Jesus, as a radiant apostle, as a brilliant lightning flash of the Sun of righteousness, O Codratus, sanctify those who keep thy holy memory.

*Theotokion:* With most sacred voices the most sacred prophets of God clearly foretold thee as the future Mother of Him Who ruleth all things, O most pure one. Him do we bless for all ages.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Grace was poured forth into thy mouth, O Phocas; wherefore thou didst convert peoples led astray by the counsel of the serpent, and, as a true shepherd, thou didst lead to Christ those who cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The assembly of the faithful hath thee, O wise one, as an ever-vigilant intercessor who calmest the raging waves of the sea, subduest temptations and deliverest from every grievous circumstance us who cry out: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Thy temple doth ever pour forth streams of healing upon those who are in need thereof, revealing itself as a haven undisturbed by waves, which driveth away the passions from those who honor thee, O martyr, and cry out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

That we may honor thy precious memory by keeping festival, O Phocas, do thou most earnestly entreat the all-good Lord, that He grant deliverance from vexations to us who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Objects of the Law prefigured thee, O all-pure one: the ark of the covenant and the jar which contained the manna, the divine table, and also the candlestick of shining gold, which bore the Light of revelation for the gentiles, Who illumineth the ends of the earth with the knowledge of God.

Ode IX

Canon to the Apostle

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Adorned in mind, thou dost stand before the comely Master as a hierarch ever most splendid and pleasing to God, as a divine apostle, truly entreating peace for the world with all the apostles, O Codratus.

Magnesia, possessing the shrine of thy relics as a divine tabernacle, O Codratus, lovingly draweth forth therefrom every benefit; and the heavenly mansions, possessing thy soul, rejoice with all the saints.

Thy radiant day, thy light-bearing memorial, thy truly illustrious feast, hath dawned like the sun upon all, and we faithfully celebrate it, O Codratus, asking that through thy prayers we find remission of sins and great mercy.

*Theotokion:* Take pity on me, O Lord, take pity on me, when Thou wilt judge me, and condemn me not to the fire, neither reprove me in Thy wrath. Thus art Thou entreated, O Christ, by the Virgin who bore Thee, and the multitude of the apostles, martyrs and prophets.

Canon to the Hieromartyr

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Come ye all, and with divine and sacred utterances let us celebrate most sacredly the most sacred memory of the sacred pastor who prayeth to God, the Benefactor, for us.

Thou didst show thyself to be consumed with zeal for the Master, O martyr, when thou wast put into the fiery bath, wherein, in gladness, thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of God, O martyr.

The choirs of hierarchs, the assemblies of martyrs, the company of sacred apostles and the souls of all the righteous, having thee in their midst, O martyr Phocas, rejoice.

Thy memory hath spread throughout the world, illumining the souls of those who with faith praise thy feats and struggles, and thy manifold sufferings, O right wondrous pastor and martyr.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, enlighten thou my soul which hath been darkened by sin, and by thy mediation deliver me from the everlasting flame of darkness, that, rejoicing, I may praise thy magnificence.

Exapostilarion of the Apostle: Spec. Mel: “In spirit in the holy place...”—

Turning the course of thy beauteous feet, O Apostle Codratus, thou didst ascend, rejoicing, to the heavenly path; and standing before the Trinity, thou dost behold the Son and the Holy Spirit in the Father. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate thy most sacred and divine memory.

Glory..., of the Hieromartyr: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars...”—

O divinely wise father, thou didst show thyself to be the glory of hierarchs, a defender of the poor and a pillar of the virtues. Wherefore, remember us who hymn thee, O Phocas.

Now and ever..., Theotokion:—

Thee do all we sinners have as an intercessor, O most holy Virgin. By thy maternal supplications hast thou rendered thy Son easily reconciled unto us.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews §311 \(4:14-5:3\).

Brethren: In that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not a high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on those who are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity. And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Reading from the Gospel

according to St. John §36 \(10:9-16\).

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

