The 27th Day Of The Month Of September

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Callistratus

& His Companions

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O martyred athlete Callistratus, thy mind illumined by the light of piety, thou didst unwaveringly tread the path which leadeth to heavenly blessedness, having vanquished all the wiles of the adversary. Wherefore, we praise thee, honoring thy sacred memory, O most blessed one.

O divinely wise martyr Callistratus, enriched by the word of life, thou didst guide unto life those who before were dead in accursedness through ignorance; and, dying with zeal, O glorious one, for the resurrection of us all, they are most truly believed to dwell in Christ. With them remember us to the all-good Lord.

O sacred martyr Gymnasius, beheaded by the sword, thou didst truly drown the Pharaoh of falsehood in the torrent of thy blood; and now thou pourest forth healings upon all who have recourse to thy temple with faith, and therein praise thy struggles, and celebrate thine honored memory, O blessed one.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone IV—

Before Thy precious Cross, death was terrifying to men; but after Thy glorious Passion, man was terrifying to death. Thus was the athlete able to abolish all the power of the enemy. Through his supplications save our souls, O Christ.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

As she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee maternally: “O my Son most desired, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the Tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How is it that Thy hands and feet, O Word, have been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, and Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, with 8 troparia; and that of the martyrs, with 4 troparia, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us send up a hymn unto our wondrous God, Who freed Israel from bondage, singing and crying out a hymn of victory unto Thee Who alone art Master.

Walking the path of suffering without faltering, for the lost thou becamest a path leading to places of divine repose, O blessed one; wherefore, having assembled, we praise thee with faith, O Callistratus.

Shining forth like a most radiant star, thou hast illumined the Church of Christ with the light of divine knowledge; and driving away the darkness of ignorance, O martyr, thou didst topple the ruined houses of falsehood.

Patiently enduring every trial, O Callistratus, thou didst not refuse to die for the Life of all; wherefore, rejoicing, thou hast passed over to immortal rest, and thou dwellest with the angelic choirs.

The sacred Gymnasius was shown to be a coal burning with the fire of the divine Spirit; and he hath utterly consumed the dross of falsehood, and bedeweth with miracles those burning with the heat of the passions.

*Theotokion:* Alone among women, thou didst supernaturally give birth to One of the Trinity, O most immaculate one, not having known man; wherefore, we glorify thee and Him Who was born of thee in manner transcending all cause and recounting.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord Who in the beginning established the heavens and founded the earth upon many waters, make me steadfast for the chanting of Thy glorification.

Refusing to offer any sacrifice unto graven deities, thou didst offer thyself as a pure sacrifice to the God of all Who was sacrificed for us, O martyred athlete Callistratus.

Arrayed in a purple robe dyed with thy truly sacred blood, O blessed martyr, thou standest, crowned, before the King of ages.

The enemy was shown to be stripped naked by the divine glory of thee and the athletes who with thee were clothed from on high, O valiant minded martyr Gymnasius.

*Theotokion:* Earnestly make supplication to thy Son, O Virgin, that He save us from the coming tribulations and from everlasting torment.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Church, making every effort today, doth offer up mystic praise for those who suffered for her, O holy and divine martyrs, right victorious and most wise.

Sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who is equally unoriginate…”—

O ye faithful, let us praise the sufferings of Callistratus, let us hymn the pangs of Gymnasius, and with love let us bless those who suffered patiently with them; and let us cry out to them: O warriors of piety, ask that we be given peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion—

O all-immaculate one, quickly heal the greatly painful sufferings of my soul and the afflictions of my flesh, and set the wanderings of my mind and my thoughts at peace. Vouchsafe, O Theotokos, that I may offer pure supplications to the King of all, and ask remission of transgressions.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee hanging of Thine own will upon the Cross between the thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother said, her womb rent with pain: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou hast been unjustly crucified on the Cross as a malefactor, desiring to bring life to the human race, in that Thou art all-good?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Arming thyself against the persecutor like a most excellent commander, O martyr, thou didst lure to divine life those made captive of old, and didst capture them.

With the showers of thy words thou hast watered men’s hearts, and thou didst guide them to the water of everlasting life, O right wondrous athlete of the Lord.

The ever-memorable Callistratus is slaughtered like a lamb, his most zealous soldiers having been slain like lambs before him.

Like a vine, O martyr Gymnasius, through the account of thy suffering thou didst produce ripe grapes, pouring forth the wine of piety.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden, cleanse thou my heart which hath been defiled by the passions, and make it a receptacle of pure and divine radiance.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Loving Christ our God most ardently, O martyr, thou didst suffer, and hast destroyed the feeble strength of the enemy.

Thou was shown to be the leader of divine recruits, O martyr Callistratus, and, rejoicing, hast enlisted in the armies of the angels.

Adorned with the glory of the splendor of martyrdom, O Gymnasius, rejoicing, thou hast now passed over to the splendors of the angels.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be the east of the Sun of righteousness, O most immaculate one. Him do thou entreat, that He save those who glorify thee in purity.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou didst break the jaws of invisible lions, O wise one, and didst show those who were devoured by the enemy to be partakers of immaterial sweetness, O martyr Callistratus.

Delivering a beautiful and divine discourse concerning God, O all-glorious Callistratus, thou didst show as divine those who before had wretchedly worshipped inanimate gods, and didst suffer with them.

Bowing your necks before Christ, O martyrs, ye accepted slaughter and offered yourselves to God as perfect sacrifices; and ye have adorned the Church of the firstborn.

*Theotokion:* Sanctify my mind and illumine my heart, O pure Mother of God, and deliver me from the evils which beset me, that I may glorify thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross…”—

Having endured multifarious wounds and manifestly received crowns from God, pray to Christ for us who celebrate your most festive memorial, O great Callistratus and ye blessed ones who suffered with him, that He may grant peace to His flock and people; for He is the confirmation of the faithful.

*Ikos:* Gazing upon the shrine of thy relics, O Callistratus, I hymn and magnify the pangs and sufferings which thou didst suffer. Wherefore, I beseech thee: Render Christ, the Judge of thy ­contest, merciful to me, that by grace He grant me utterance with divine words, that I may be able to praise thy struggles; for no man is able to recount thy mighty deeds: how thou didst manfully enter the tribunal, denouncing the creeping thoughts of the tyrants. Christ is the confirmation of the faithful!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Made lustrous as gold by the fire of torments, thou wast shown to be a symbol of the sufferings of Christ, O glorious one, and hast now been laid up in the treasury of God, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Strengthened by sufferings, thou didst show thyself to be a heaven-forged sword, O Callistratus, cutting down hordes of invisible demons and crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou wast revealed as strong against impiety with the might of the Trinity, O Callistratus; and, illumined with the effulgence thereof, thou now criest out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Loving Christ with steadfast mind, O divinely inspired martyr Gymnasius, thou wast slain with all thy fellow zealots, chanting in thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O divinely joyous one, entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee in manner past understanding and recounting, that we be saved who honor thee with love and cry out together: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Trampling down the fire and flame in the furnace, the divinely eloquent youths did chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Uprooting the thorns of falsehood, thou didst show thyself to be a most comely garden of paradise, O martyr, producing fruits of piety through divine grace.

Looking to the expectations to come in perfect hope, thou didst set thyself apart for struggles, and, emerging triumphant, thou wast lawfully crowned, O Callistratus.

Acquiring the healing of thy temple, O glorious Gymnasius, those who piously have recourse to it are delivered from evils, praising thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* In that thou art more exalted than all creatures, O divinely joyous and most immaculate Maiden, make my mind exalted above the temptations of the deceiver.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

The shrine of thy relics poureth forth healing upon all in need, O martyr Callistratus: it truly halteth illnesses difficult to cure, and dispelleth the darkness of evil spirits through the activity, power and grace of the Spirit.

Bound one to another by grace, O martyrs of Christ, ye were shown to be like a divinely fashioned chain leading up on high and sanctifying the earth with the shedding of your blood. Wherefore, we faithfully celebrate your memory in gladness.

With those who suffered with thee thou hast manifestly received an imperishable crown, everlasting glory and gladness, never-ending joy and the heavenly kingdom, O divinely wise Callistratus. With them remember us to the Lord.

Shining forth today more brightly than the sun, the divine memory of the wise Callistratus, Gymnasius and those who suffered with them illumineth the ends of the earth with radiant brilliance. Through their supplications, O Christ, free us from condemnation.

*Theotokion:* With gladsome mind we cry out to thee with the voice of Gabriel: Rejoice, O joy of the faithful! Rejoice, O golden lampstand, table, mountain and noetic gate! Rejoice, O divine chariot of Christ the King! Rejoice, O most blessed one, thou loosing of the curse!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

O the wonder! How have those who are clay by nature been shown to be golden? For neither fire, nor the sword, nor the teeth of wild beasts, nor tortures, nor wounds destroyed them; and, having cast down the incorporeal one with their flesh, they pray for us to the Lord.

Theotokion—

Rejoice, O palace of God! Rejoice, O mountain densely wooded! Rejoice, O divine table! Rejoice, bush unburnt! Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, golden jar! Rejoice, most radiant lamp! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, thou light cloud!

