ThE 30th Day Of The Month Of September

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Gregory Of Greater Armenia

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Michael of Kiev\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Having dyed thy sacred vesture in the blood of thy martyrdom, thou didst enter into the holy of holies, O right wondrous martyr, where there is ineffable light, divine glory, and the voice of one who keepeth festival, receiving therein the reward of thy labors: an imperishable crown, glory which is everlasting and a dwelling-place in paradise, O wise Gregory. Pray thou with boldness in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

The threefold waves of tortures did not shake thy soul, nor did thy long imprisonment, enclosed in a gloomy pit, O glorious athlete. But thou hast shone forth like light upon those who languish in the darkness of vainglory, and hast shown them to be children of the day through the font of baptism, through higher and saving regeneration, and truly divine life, in that thou art a God-pleasing hierarch, O most wise Gregory. *Twice*

Rhipsimia, loving Thee, the Master of all, the immortal Bridegroom, accepted the flaying of the skin of her body, having first through abstinence rent asunder the dark hairshirt of the passions; and with her the ever-memorable Gaïana also struggled, leading an assembly of virgins who suffered mightily and cast down the ancient deceiver of Eve. Praising them as is meet, we glorify Thee, O Christ. *Twice*

Glory…, the composition of Sergius, idiomelon, in the same tone—

Who can recount the victories of thy virtues as is meet? What mouth can describe thine endurance of torture? For in both wast thou triumphant, O Gregory. O saint of God, cease thou never to pray, that our souls be saved, for thou hast great boldness, O hieromartyr.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

When of old the unblemished ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried out: “What is this sight, new and all-glorious, O my sweet Child? How is it that the ungrateful people have betrayed Thee to the judgment-seat of Pilate and condemn the Life of all to death? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VI—

Noetically entering into the impenetrable cloud of ineffable light, the martyr and pastor learned the ineffable mysteries of Christ, for he was enlightened as a martyr and taught the mysteries as a pastor. Wherefore, he hath been crowned with a twofold wreath of heavenly glory, ever beseeching Christ in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest on the Tree, suspended in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even unto the shedding of thy blood. O hieromartyr Gregory, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the hieromartyr, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee, the vigilant shepherd, O martyr”, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Standing, crowned, before the worshipful Trinity as a vigilant shepherd and a sacred martyr, with thy sacred supplications lull to sleep the dark fantasies of my passions, for I praise thee, O blessed Gregory.

Today hath the never-waning luminary, the great hierarch, the much-suffering pastor, the test of struggles, the boast of Armenia summoned us to hymnody. Assembling, let us bless him.

Thou wast full of living waters, O blessed Gregory, like a river issuing forth from the noetic Eden, watering the face of the Church and drying up the abyss of idolatry.

*Theotokion:* Strengthened by the Cross of Him Who became incarnate of thee, O pure one, the women suffered mightily; and they have been brought before Him in thy train, resplendent in the brilliance of virginity and the blood of martyrdom.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

With the wounds of thy struggles thou didst break the teeth of the lions, and, inundating the blood of the demons with the outpourings of thy blood, thou dost cast down the temples of the idols from their foundation, O right wondrous one.

Neither the oppression of the wicked, nor bitter tortures, nor long imprisonment in a most gloomy pit altered thine adamantine resolve, O right wondrous martyr.

Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyes, O martyr, until thou didst show forth as children of the day those wickedly held fast in evil slumber, who cry: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* The martyr Rhipsimia, knowing thee to be the only Virgin Mother, O Maiden, desired thy beauties; and, resplendent in her sufferings, she was led before Christ in thy train.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Having brightly illumined thy soul with all-radiant splendors, O hierarch, thou didst enlighten the face of the earth with virtues, having Christ within thy heart; and like a never-setting sun thou dost enlighten the assemblies of the nations, adorning us with the beauties of martyrdom, O Gregory most wise. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Though I love sin, I beseech thee who gavest birth to the sinless God Who taketh away the sin of the world, O all-hymned one, that thou take pity on my most sinful soul and wash away my many sins; for thou art the cleansing of sinners and the salvation and defense of the faithful.

Stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter times gave birth in the flesh to Thee Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “Woe is me, O most beloved Jesus! How is it that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels art now crucified by iniquitous men? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The Most High Lord, exalted in power, led thee up to the lofty eminence of martyrdom, O glorious one; and, rejoicing, thou didst emulate His sufferings, O hieromartyr, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power!

With divine power thou didst cast down the ungodly foe who was destroying all the land of Armenia, and, shining forth like a ray of light, thou didst illumine those who lay in the darkness of vanity, O wise one.

O Gregory, thou didst bring to the Creator a talant increased many times: those saved by thy divine teachings; and thou hast received from Him a portion which groweth not old: a kingdom and splendor in the heavens.

*Theotokion:* The virgin maidens who suffered with Rhipsimia loved thee in that thou art beautiful, elect and comely, O Virgin Mother Mary, and, rejoicing, they have been brought before thy Son in thy train.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Thou didst manifestly behold the sign of the Cross shining with light, destroying the night of idolatry, and making the faithful children of the light.

In a pit most deep Christ God saved thee who wast long enclosed with wild beasts, yet desired to illumine the mindless ones with the light of the divine Word.

Having struggled in martyrdom, thou wast crowned as a victor; and anointed with the oil of the high priesthood, thou didst anoint the people, delivering them from fœtid falsehood, O Gregory.

*Theotokion:* The virgins, sensing the sweet fragrance of the myrrh of the Word Who shone forth from thee, O pure Virgin, rejoicing, pleased Him well with the struggles of martyrdom.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

By the power of thy words were the temples of the idols destroyed, the fragile graven images of the demons cast down, and the hearts of the faithful made steadfast with divine love.

To the Lord didst thou lead like a lamb Tiridates, who was bound like a wild boar, and before was like a ravening wolf, but now is saved through the great bounty of God’s compassion.

By thy true teachings thou didst show the divine path to the lost, O hierarch Gregory, acting as a shepherd, emulating the true Shepherd.

*Theotokion:* When Rhipsimia recognized the Crucified One Who had become incarnate of thee, O Theotokos, she was crucified with Him, offering herself as a lamb to a shepherd, as an unblemished sacrifice to God.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The ­steadfast…”—

O ye faithful, in songs and hymns let us all praise today the right glorious hierarch Gregory as an athlete, a vigilant shepherd and teacher, a universal luminary and champion; for he prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.

*Ikos:* In hymns let us praise this divine luminary, great among athletes, the faithful pastor and teacher of Armenia, and let us crown his head with divine hymnody; for he hath destroyed the darkness of the ungodliness of the idols, and with them hath deadened all the activity of the demons. Wherefore, having borne labors with mighty mind and grace, he now prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having endured multifarious tortures, O martyr, thou hast freed many from manifold torments and the grief which is to come, crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Making thyself a house of the Trinity, O blessed one, thou didst destroy the temples of the idols and didst raise up temples to the Word Who seeth all things, for the salvation of the people.

Thou wast shown to be a performer of the sacred rites, and didst first offer thyself fervently to thy Master as a sacrifice; and sacrificing to Him later, thou givest Him to pious souls for their salvation.

*Theotokion:* Adorned with the crowns of martyrdom, the maidens were brought before God Who shone forth from the Virgin, chanting in hymnody: Blessed art Thou, O Christ!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Having suffered lawfully, thou didst most mightily put to shame the iniquitous foes, O hierarch Gregory, and hast led to God a multitude of those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Cultivating a barren field, thou didst sow the seeds of the Word, reaping a harvest of the grain of the Word an hundredfold, yielding souls in abundance for the Husbandman.

With the brilliance of thy discourses thou didst illumine many myriads, and didst lead them forth to Him Who willingly endured sufferings for our sake, to Whom we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Unafraid of the multitude of tortures, and refusing to submit to carnal pleasures, Rhipsimia confessed the Lord Who came forth from the Virgin, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Strengthened by the power of Christ, thou didst endure the pangs of tortures, and didst break the fangs of the demons and demolish the temples of the idols; and thou hast illumined men who were in ignorance, O most honored hieromartyr.

Like the dawn hath thy memorial shone forth upon us, bearing the radiance of grace; for thou wast shown to be a receptacle of divine Light, and hast ascended to the never-waning Light, O richly illumined with divine effulgence, O venerable one.

Thou hast been shown to be a converser with the prophets, and dweller with the martyrs and the apostles, the hierarchs and the venerable, and a peer of the angels. With them, O father, entreat Him Who loveth mankind, in behalf of us who honor thee.

The honorable women were valiant, rectifying the fall of Eve, and they endured threefold waves of tortures; and him who boasted exceedingly against the heights of heaven they crushed beneath their most beautiful feet. We bless them as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Illumined with the light of the countenance of Him Who shone forth from thee, O Ever-virgin, in her flesh Rhipsimia emulated His sufferings and death with unbounded love. Wherefore, she now rejoiceth with thee, O Mistress.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples…”—

Let us praise the glorious Gregory, who was long enclosed in a pit with fierce beasts, who transformed the tyrant Tiridates into a wild boar, and proclaimed the word of enlightenment to all the land.

Theotokion—

O Theotokos who art more honorable than all other creatures and who gavest birth to Christ, entreat Him, that this, thy little flock, be preserved unharmed by all the assaults of the adversary.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos; and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the hieromartyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Corinthians, §166

\[I Cor. 16: 13-24\]

Brethren: Watch, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong. Let all your things be done with charity. I beseech you, brethren, \(ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,\) That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one that helpeth with us, and laboreth. I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied. For they have refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye those who are such. The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house. All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an holy kiss. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema. Maranatha. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed in righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Matthew, §103

\[Mt 24: 42-47\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

