The 3rd Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of the Holy and Righteous Symeon

the God-receiver, and the Holy Anna the Prophetess

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Nicholas of Japan\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 3 stichera of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

The Creator of all and our Deliverer is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother; wherefore, the elder, receiving Him, cried aloud with joy: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Good One, as Thou hast been pleased.”

Symeon, receiving in his arms from the Virgin the Savior of all Who was begotten before all the ages, cried aloud to the ends of the earth: “I have seen the effulgence of Thy glory!” Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Good One, for I have beheld Thee today!”

Symeon, bearing in his arms the Savior Who for the salvation of men was born in the fullness of time, cried aloud, rejoicing: “I have beheld the light of the nations and the glory of Israel! Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, at Thy command, from among those here, as Thou didst say, in that Thou art God!”

And 3 stichera of the saint, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign....”—

As one righteous and perfect and glorious in all, O divinely inspired one, thou didst take up in thine arms the one perfect God, incarnate, Who came to justify the world; and thou didst cry out to Him, that thou mightest be released from thy body: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for I have beheld Thee today, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Young in spirit, yet elderly of body, O Symeon, thou hadst received the promise that thou wouldst not see death until thou wouldst behold a young Babe Who before time is the Creator and God of all, yet humbled Himself by assuming flesh; and beholding Him, thou didst cry out and didst ask to be loosed of the flesh, passing over, rejoicing, to the mansions of God.

The divinely inspired Anna and the all-rich Symeon, resplendent in prophecy, manifest as blameless according to the law, beholding the Bestower of the law manifest among us as a Babe, now have worshipped Him. Their memory do we now joyously celebrate, glorifying Jesus Who loveth mankind, as is meet.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone V: the composition of Germanus—

The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother, fulfilling the promise of His own law; and Symeon, receiving Him, said: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven....”—

Now let us celebrate the saving grace of the ineffable manifestation of God; for Christ God, having without change become a babe through the Virgin Maiden, is borne by His Mother into the temple of God the Father, and Symeon, receiving Him, embraceth Him in his arms.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Of old Thou wast seen by the prophets, insofar as they were able to see Thee, O Jesus; but now, O Word of God, Thou hast of Thine own will revealed Thyself to the whole world, in the flesh, through the Virgin Mary, O Christ, and Thou hast manifested Thy salvation to all who are descended from Adam, in that Thou lovest mankind.

*Stichos:* A light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

O Christ Who of old laid down the law on Mount Sinai, now, fulfilling the provisions of the law on Mount Sion, Thou hast desired to be borne into the temple in the flesh, in the arms of the Theotokos, together with doves for sacrifice, and to be held in the arms of Symeon.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the composition of the Monk John, in Tone I—

Today, He Who gave the law to Moses on Sinai submitteth to the commands of the law, having become like us for our sake, in that He is full of loving-kindness. Now our pure God, as a holy Infant, having opened the womb of the pure one, is offered to Himself, as God, freeing our souls from the curse of the law and enlightening them.

Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the feast, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed...”—

Having become a babe for my sake, Thou wast borne into the temple, O Life of all; and having of old engraved the law on stone tablets on Mount Sinai, Thou hast placed Thyself under the law, that Thou mightest set all free from the ancient servitude to the law. Glory to Thy compassion, O Savior! Glory to Thy Kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father is equally without beginning...”—

O Savior, Creator, Master and Bestower of the law, fulfilling the customs, Thou wast borne into the temple; and by Thine own good pleasure Thou art carried in the flesh in the arms of Symeon, O Thou Who art awesome to all and sustainest all creation. Thou didst desire to reveal Thy light to all of us, O Thou Who alone art compassionate.

Glory..., Now and ever...: the foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and that of the saint, with 6 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, in Tone III

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the saint, the acrostic whereof is: “Accept thou a hymn, O Symeon the God-receiver,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O righteous Symeon, who abidest in joy in the righteous mansions of the just Lord: pray thou, O all-blessed one, that they who celebrate thy divine repose may be justified.

As an observer of the law, O most sacred one, thou didst behold the Babe Whom the law proclaimed; and having died in accordance with the law of nature, O God-receiver, thou didst pass on, rejoicing, to life immortal.

Thou didst behold Him Who holdest the ends of the universe in His arms borne in the arms of the Virgin; and taking Him into thine honored embrace, thou wast shown to be greater than Moses, O thou who art all-rich.

*Theotokion:* He Who is full emptieth Himself; He Who is preëternal beginneth to be; the Logos becometh flesh; the Creator is formed; the Infinite confineth Himself to space, becoming incarnate in thy womb, O thou who art full of the grace of God.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Elevated by sacred activities, O divinely eloquent one, thou wast like a lofty, splendid tower of the All-holy Spirit, manifestly made steadfast. Wherefore, we praise thee.

O Symeon, thou didst behold the Lord of the law, Who opened the Virgin’s womb, became a mortal babe, and granteth deliverance unto all.

He Who fashioned man with His own hands is held in thine arms, incarnate, sanctifying thee ­manifestly; and He letteth thee depart to the life to come as thou hast requested, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* As Symeon beheld the One incarnate of thy blood in manner past understanding, O all-immaculate one, rejoicing, he blessed thee, the noetic tongs which bore the divine Coal.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today....”—

Today the elder asked to be loosed from the bonds of this life of corruption, receiving in his arms Christ, the Creator and Lord.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity....”—

Rejoicing, the sacred Symeon took Thee up Who hadst become incarnate of the Virgin, O Christ, crying: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master! And Anna, the blameless and glorious prophetess, now offereth Thee confession and hymnody. And we, O Bestower of life, cry out to Thee: Glory to Thee Who hast thus been well pleased!

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Though thou didst grow elderly in age, yet wast thou ever young in faith, desiring to behold the newborn Babe, the most Perfect One Who reneweth the world which hath grown old through the assault of the ancient enemy.

Together let us bless the blessed Symeon, as the one who was counted worthy to behold our blessed God wrapped in the flesh, that He might make blessed those who before were accursed.

Recognizing Thee as the Bestower of the law, Who, in manner outside the laws of nature had become incarnate, Symeon cried out: “O Thou Who alone art Lord, let me now go to life incorruptible!”

*Theotokion:* He Who bearest all things in His hand, Who is borne in the arms of the Ever-virgin, hath made her higher than the cherubim and the seraphim, in that she gave Him birth. Her do we hymn and piously call blessed.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Serving God Almighty in purity of mind like an angel, O blessed one, of old thou didst cleanse the people of Israel with bloody sacrifices, clearly prefiguring the blood of the Savior.

With godly deeds didst thou make of thyself a most holy temple for God, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, in the holy temple thou didst behold God as a babe in the flesh, Who transfereth thee to the divine habitations.

Joining chorus spiritually today, let us all hymn Symeon the God-receiver, and with him the chaste Anna, who were prophets of God and beheld Him Who for our sake became a Child.

*Theotokion:* He Who is immutable of nature, born of thee, manifested Himself as man without burning thy womb, O thou who art more holy than the cherubim; and through thy birthgiving He hath joined to Himself those thrust aside by corruption, O Mother of God.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

When thou didst behold the Lord as thou was promised, O Symeon, thou didst cry out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Savior, to proclaim Thy divine incarnation to all in hades!”

Thou wast adorned and wast more splendid than Moses, taking in thine arms Him Who is beauteous in comeliness, Who for our sake became a babe like us, O elder Symeon.

Those confined below, beholding thee full of divine waters and descended into the nether regions of hades, O Symeon, were filled with divine dew.

*Theotokion:* The most evil one seeketh ever to ensnare me; but rescue me from his traps, O Mistress, and preserve me whole under the divine shelter of thy wings.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold, for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the boundless bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

As one truly righteous and blameless in the law, O blessed one, thou didst serve the Lord Almighty in accordance with the law. Wherefore, thou dost chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The joy of the sorrowful, the deliverance of Israel hath truly appeared as a babe in His own temple! Let me depart unto the life to come! Symeon cried out, rejoicing.

In the loving-kindness of Thy compassions, O Savior, let me Thy servant depart, who have been worn out with the writing of the law and am bowed down with old age; for I have seen Thee bearing flesh on earth! Symeon cried out.

*Theotokion:* He Who filleth the all-pure bosom of the Father Who begat Him, without forsaking it sitteth in thy womb, O pure one, as a babe manifestly preparing a sacred throne for those whose form He desired to assume, O all-pure one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The all-praised widow Anna, resplendent with the grace of prophecy, glorified the all-divine One Who had come to adorn the bride, the world which was bereft of divine glory, and she manifested the divine deliverance which was to come to all present.

O blessed priest, thou didst offer up the lambs as sacrifices of the law, for ineffable mercy, proclaiming beforehand the blood of the Savior; and receiving Him incarnate, O Symeon, thou wast shown to be more glorious than Moses and all the prophets.

Having beheld Him Whom thou didst desire, thou didst receive release from thy body, O divinely inspired one, and like a twittering bird thou didst pass over to the fathers, O glorious one, nurtured in goodly old age. Wherefore, with spiritual joy we celebrate thy most festive memory.

*Theotokion:* Like a lily, like a fragrant rose, like a divine perfume did the All-divine Word find thee, O all-pure Bride of God; and He made His abode within thy womb, making fragrant our nature which through sin had become full of fœtor, O Mary Theotokos.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Precious indeed are thy hands which were touched by the divine limbs of Him Who touched the mountains so that they smoked, as David chanteth, O God-receiver; yea, truly blessed wast thou. Wherefore, we praise thee as is meet.

Thy shrine poureth forth healings upon the faithful, and thy blessed memory outshineth the sun, illumining the souls of all and dispelling the noetic darkness, O most honored initiate of the mysteries.

The chaste Prophetess Anna and the glorious elder Symeon illumine the earth with noetic radiance, like the sun and the moon. For their sake, O Lord Who lovest mankind, deliver us from the darkness of sin.

*Theotokion:* When he saw thee manifested as the Mother of God, O Theotokos, the elder said prophetically: “Behold, thy Son is set for the rise and fall of many, O Mistress, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.”

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women....”—

The Word. Who is immutable in Hypostasis, in thee, O Theotokos, united Himself to the flesh without seed, becoming a babe; and bearing Him in thine arms, like the throne of the cherubim, thou hast now offered Him to God the Father; and the elder Symeon, rejoicing, hath received Him.

Glory..., Now and ever...: that of the feast—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say, for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel.”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day....”—

Take up in thine arms the Creator of all, O Symeon! O elder, take up Christ to Whom the Virgin Maiden gave birth without seed, unto the joy of our race!

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

O ye people, assembling, let us hymn the one Benefactor, the Bestower of the law, the Creator and God of the law, before Whom the multitudes of angels tremble, unto the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* A light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I have beheld Thee, O Christ, the preëternal Light of revelation for the Gentiles and Israel, Who hast bound me in fleshly bonds.

Glory..., Now and ever...: in Tone II—

The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the priest in the temple; and stretching forth his hands, Symeon received Him, rejoicing, and cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord and Master, according to Thy word.”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode I of the canon of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint..

Prokimenon of the feast, and this one of the saint, in Tone VII—

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 321 from the midpoint \[Heb 9:11-14\]

Brethren: Christ being come a High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by His own blood He entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, Who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living and true God?

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart.

Gospel according to Luke, § 8 \[Lk 2:25-38\]

At that time, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Symeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Spirit was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for Him after the custom of the law, then took he Him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said: “Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word: for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before the face of all people: a light to lighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.” And Joseph and His mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of Him. And Symeon blessed them, and said unto Mary His mother: “Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; \(Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,\) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.” And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity; And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, who departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of Him to all who looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

