Also on The 3rd Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Afterfeast of the Meeting of the Lord

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints, Nicholas, Archbishop of Japan,

the Equal of the Apostles

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera of Saint Symeon, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

As one righteous and perfect and glorious in all, O divinely inspired one, thou didst take up in thine arms the one perfect God, incarnate, Who came to justify the world; and thou didst cry out to Him, that thou mightest be released from thy body: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for I have beheld Thee today, O Thou Who lovest mankind!” *Twice*

Young in spirit, yet elderly of body, O Symeon, thou hadst received the promise that thou wouldst not see death until thou wouldst behold a young Babe Who before time is the Creator and God of all, yet humbled Himself by assuming flesh; and beholding Him, thou didst cry out and didst ask to be loosed of the flesh, passing over, rejoicing, to the mansions of God.

The divinely inspired Anna and the all-rich Symeon, resplendent in prophecy, manifest as blameless according to the law, beholding the Bestower of the law manifest among us as a Babe, now have worshipped Him. Their memory do we now joyously celebrate, glorifying Jesus Who loveth mankind, as is meet.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O prophet and preacher of Christ, thou art never separated from the throne of Majesty, and ever intercedest for any who is infirm; and, ministering in the highest, thou fillest the whole world with healings. O thou who art everywhere glorified, ask thou illumination for our souls.

Now & ever…, in Tone IV—

Today the sacred Mother, who is more exalted than the sanctuary, hath entered into the holy place, showing forth to the world the Law-giver and Creator of the law. And the elder Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, cried out, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, for I have seen Thee, the Savior of our souls!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

The spiritual radiance of thy mind revealed itself, O Prophet Symeon, resplendent in purity. Like a mirror thou didst manifestly illumine the world with the effulgence of divine knowledge, shining forth and lighting the way for Him Who is to come, Who granteth grace unto all men through thy supplications, O all-wondrous one.

*Stichos:* Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.

As the mouth of God, thou didst manifestly denounce the workers of impiety, condemning them with inescapable judgment, O wondrous Symeon, following the teaching of righteousness and the judgments of God. Wherefore, perceiving the sublimity of thine all-wise words, O blessed one, we praise thee with hymns as is meet.

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

Standing before the throne of the Master, delighting in ineffable glory, beholding heavenly beauty and full of light, O divinely eloquent Prophet Symeon, be thou mindful of those who honor thee with faith, asking salvation of soul and remission of offenses for them all, O thou who art close to God.

Glory…, in Tone I—

Symeon cried out: “Behold! This Child, Who is both God and man, shall be a sign which shall be spoken against! To Him let us cry out, O ye faithful: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!”

Now & ever…, in Tone VII—

Submitting to the precepts of the law, O Mary Theotokos, thou dost offer unto God the High Priest of all: the only-begotten Son, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, Who in latter times became incarnate without seed, Who opened the womb of thee, His Mother, and dwelt among men. And Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, announced to the people: “This is God, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, the Deliverer of our souls!”

After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart…”, the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

The Creator of all and our Deliverer is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother; wherefore, the elder, receiving Him, cried aloud with joy: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Good One, as Thou hast been pleased.”

Symeon, receiving in his arms from the Virgin the Savior of all Who was begotten before all the ages, cried aloud to the ends of the earth: “I have seen the effulgence of Thy glory!” Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Good One, for I have beheld Thee today!”

Symeon, bearing in his arms the Savior Who for the salvation of men was born in the fullness of time, cried aloud, rejoicing: “I have beheld the light of the nations and the glory of Israel! Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, at Thy command, from among those here, as Thou didst say, in that Thou art God!”

And 5 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise…”—

How can we hymn thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, equal of the apostles? For thou didst dare to leave thy pious homeland, thy parents, thy home and thy friends, and like the apostles of Christ thou didst depart unto an unknown and far-away land, where thou didst meet with wrath and malice, and those who, out of hatred for Christ and thy preaching, desired to slay thee. Yet Christ preserved thee, Who sent thee forth and hath great mercy. *Twice*

How can we hymn thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, equal of the apostles? For, as a latter-day disciple of Cyril and Methodius, the enlighteners of the Slavs, thou didst tread their narrow and difficult path, with great labor translating all the books of Orthodox piety, and giving the people of Japan a priceless treasure, that, enlightened with knowledge, they might pray to God in their own language, and that the Church of Christ our God might flourish among them, for He hath great mercy. *Twice*

How can we hymn thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, equal of the apostles? For the Lord hath crowned thee with wreaths of holiness, hierarchy and apostleship: for, forsaking the world, thou didst dedicate thyself wholly to the service of God, and, performing the mystic sacrifice of thanksgiving as heavenly food for thy children, thou didst preach the word of Christ. And, dwelling now with the apostles, thou dost entreat Christ in our behalf, for He hath great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

As Thou art the Orient from on high, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, illumine with Thy never-waning light the whole land of the rising sun, and pour forth Thine enlightening grace, that all nations, moved to compunction, may enter the door of the sheep-fold of the Orthodox Church and bring to Thee the fruits of piety in abundance, and may thus repay the onerous labors of the equal of the apostles of their land, the holy hierarch Nicholas. Through his supplications save the souls of all who honor his venerable memory.

Now & ever…, the composition of Germanus, in Tone V—

The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother, fulfilling the promise of His own law; and Symeon, receiving Him, said: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those who love me; they who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untutored, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those who understand, and right to those who find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy are with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At Litia, these stichera—

*The composition of Anatolius, in Tone I:* The Ancient of days, Who of old gave the law to Moses on Sinai, is seen today as a babe, and as the Creator of the law, under the law and fulfilling the law, He is borne into the temple and given to the elder. And the righteous Symeon, receiving Him, and seeing the utter fulfillment of the promises, cried out with joy: “Mine eyes have seen the mystery hidden from before time, which hath been revealed in these latter days: the Light illumining the darkness of the unbelieving nations, giving glory to the newly-­chosen Israel! Wherefore, release Thy servant from the bonds of this flesh to the wondrous life which ageth not and is without end, granting the world great mercy!”

*In Tone VI:* The joyous day of the memorial of the God-seer and God-receiver Symeon hath dawned! For today he standeth in prayer before the majestic throne of Him Whom, in life, he bore in his arms, Whom he announced in prophecy, saying: “Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel!” And to her who bore Him he exclaimed: “And thou, O all-pure one: a sword shall pierce through thy heart!” Honoring his holy festival and annual commemoration, O ye faithful, let us cry out to him: O divinely wise God-bearer, O righteous Symeon, who bore witness as a herald of the mysteries of the Gospel and wast full of the Holy Spirit: cease thou never to entreat Him Whom thou didst bear as an infant in thine arms, in our behalf, that He deliver us from standing on the left side on the day of judgment, and that He free us from everlasting torment and save our souls, in that He is compassionate and loveth mankind!

*In Tone I:* The divine Comforter, the Holy Spirit of truth, enlightened thy heart and understanding, that thou mightest serve those who knew not Christ; and thou didst arrive in the land of Japan, proclaiming the incarnate Savior of the world by the truth of thine acts and words. Him do thou entreat, O Nicholas equal of the apostles, that we all be saved.

Be thou enlightened and rejoice, O land of Japan, having the holy hierarch Nicholas as thine apostle, who standeth before the throne of the heavenly Father and prayeth for thee and thy people, that they may receive the Gospel in their heart and mind, and live with Christ forever.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O holy hierarch Nicholas, living and laboring tirelessly in heathen Japan with wisdom and righteousness, all the days of thy life thou didst turn the malice of the hard-hearted people into meekness and love. Wherefore, when thou didst reach the end of thine ever-memorable struggle, and didst pass from hence to the eternal mansions, all wept at being deprived of thee, and even to this day fall down before thy tomb, asking the assistance of the supplications of thee, who preserved well the apostolic covenant and who, as a bishop of the Church, won the recognition of those outside the Faith, and not only his own. Wherefore, cease not to keep watch over thy flock, that thy baptized children may advance in piety, and that the unbaptized may find mercy and enter the bosom of the Orthodox Church, and that all may be saved who celebrate thy holy memory with love.

Now & ever…, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in the same tone—

He Who is borne upon the cherubim and is hymned by the seraphim, borne into the temple of God today in accordance with the law, sitteth in the arms of the elder as on a throne, and as God receiveth gifts from Joseph: a pair of turtle-doves—the undefiled Church and the people newly-chosen from among the gentiles; and two young pigeons—the Ruler of the Old and the New. And Symeon, finally receiving the fulfillment of the promise made to him and blessing the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, foretold in imagery the sufferings she would endure and asked from God deliverance, crying out: “Now let me depart, O Master, as Thou didst tell me before; for I have seen Thee, the preëternal Light, the Savior and Lord of the Christian people!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Now let us celebrate the saving grace of the ineffable manifestation of God; for Christ God, having without change become a babe through the Virgin Maiden, is borne by His Mother into the temple of God the Father, and Symeon, receiving Him, embraceth Him in his arms.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Of old Thou wast seen by the prophets, insofar as they were able to see Thee, O Jesus; but now, O Word of God, Thou hast of Thine own will revealed Thyself to the whole world, in the flesh, through the Virgin Mary, O Christ, and Thou hast manifested Thy salvation to all who are descended from Adam, in that Thou lovest mankind.

*Stichos:* A light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

O Christ Who of old laid down the law on Mount Sinai, now, fulfilling the provisions of the law on Mount Sion, Thou hast desired to be borne into the temple in the flesh, in the arms of the Theotokos, together with doves for sacrifice, and to be held in the arms of Symeon.

Glory…, in Tone II—

The beloved and only-begotten Son, the Image of the hypostasis of the preëternal Father, Who came to save the human race, called thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, to serve Him by spreading the glad tidings of the Gospel; for He hath commanded His disciples to teach all nations. And, made steadfast by the grace of the Holy Spirit, thou didst teach and baptize the people of Japan, planting the kingdom of God in that country.

Now & ever…, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone I—

Today, He Who gave the law to Moses on Sinai submitteth to the commands of the law, having become like us for our sake, in that He is full of loving-kindness. Now our pure God, as a holy Infant, having opened the womb of the pure one, is offered to Himself, as God, freeing our souls from the curse of the law and enlightening them.

After the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV—

O holy hierarch Nicholas, equal of the apostles, O thou who didst share in the ways of the apostles and sit upon their throne, O faithful and divinely wise servant of Christ, chosen harp of the divine Spirit, vessel overflowing with the love of Christ, enlightener of the land of Japan: Pray thou to the life-bestowing Trinity in behalf of all thy flock and for the whole world. *Twice*

And the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…: that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Receiving a command from on high in the temple of God, that thou go forth to be an apostle for Japan, and armed with the cross of monasticism and the grace of the priesthood thou didst leave thy homeland and didst depart unto a distant and pagan land. Yet struggling zealously with the help of grace, thou didst reap as fruits of joy many souls of the saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I: automelon—

Let the choir of the angels marvel at the wonder! And let us mortals lift up our voices in hymnody, beholding the ineffable condescension of God; for He Who alone loveth mankind, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, do the arms of the elder now embrace.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Elevated by God to the rank of an apostle, thou didst receive the covenant of Christ in the depths of thy soul; and though thou wast like a lamb among wolves, thou wast in nowise afraid, but, baptizing the people, building churches and raising up temples, thou didst fulfill the commandment in godly manner. Wherefore, for thee an incorruptible crown of righteousness hath been reserved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Let the choir of angels…”—

He Who is with the Father on the holy throne, coming to earth was born of the Virgin; He Who is unlimited by time became a babe; and Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, said, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Compassionate One, gladdening me!”

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, equal of the apostles, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A O hear this, all ye people; ponder it with your ears, all ye that dwell in the world. \[Ps. 48:1\]

B My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48:3\]

A Come, ye children, and hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33:11\]

B I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39:11a\]

A My talk hath been of thy truth, and of thy salvation. \[Ps. 39:12b\]

B I will declare thy Name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. \[Ps. 21:22\]

A That I may show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25:7\]

B Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwelleth. \[Ps. 25:8\]

A I have hated the congregation of the wicked, and will not sit among the ungodly. \[Ps. 25:5\]

B Because I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not forsaken my God, as the wicked doth. \[Ps. 17:21\]

A The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue will be talking of judgment. \[Ps. 36:31\]

B His righteousness endureth for ever. \[Ps. 110:3b\]

A Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints sing with joyfulness. \[Ps. 131:9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be alway praising thee. \[Ps. 83:4\]

Glory...; Now and ever...,

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having drunk deeply of the wisdom of God in thy home, and in the churches and streets of Russia with mind and heart, thou becamest a wellspring of the waters which flow forth unto life everlasting; and wherever thou wast, thou didst give the Spirit of life as drink to all around thee. Thou didst convert the Japanese to Orthodoxy, and starting from the beginning didst establish a foundation for the Church in Japan; and thou art hymned today, as is meet. Entreat Christ God to prosper thy work and grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Thou didst become a babe for my sake, O Ancient of days, and didst partake of cleansing, O most pure God, that Thou mightest assume me of the flesh thou didst receive from the Virgin. And Symeon, taught thereby, recognized Thee as God appearing in the flesh, and the elder kissed Thee, our Life, and, rejoicing, cried out: “Release me, for I have seen Thee, the Life of all!”

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, §35,

from the midpoint \[10: 1-9\]

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Thou hast hastened from earth to the heavens, O holy hierarch Nicholas, and didst live, not for thyself, but for thy Savior, Who hath commanded us to lay down our lives for our friends; and in Japan thou didst announce the Gospel of salvation, and didst lead to Christ many people, who see in thee the image of Christ.

Canon of the feast of the Meeting, with 6 troparia, including the irmos, and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Joyously the elder embraceth Christ”, the composition of Cosmas of Maïuma, in Tone III—

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “O Japan, be thou saved by Orthodoxy!”, the composition of Parthenius,

in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Delivered from bitter bondage, Israel traversed the impassable as though it were dry land, and, seeing the enemy drowning, they chanted a hymn to God, as to their Benefactor, Who worketh wonders with His upraised arm, for He hath been glorified.

Like Moses, thou didst not fear the threats of Pharaoh, but didst pass over to lead the Japanese race across the sea of baptism to the promised land of Orthodoxy, chanting to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

The cloud of the grace of God covered thee during days of peril, and a divine light illumined thee during the night when the people deserted thee, for with steadfast patience thou didst chant to the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified.

Once Moses gave his people the law on Sinai, but now Nicholas hath given to the people of Japan the whole law of Orthodox piety, that they might learn and grow, chanting to the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified.

*Theotokion:* O Mother who knewest not wedlock, cease not to render aid, that by the supplications of Nicholas, the equal of the apostles, Orthodoxy might flourish in Japan, the whole nation be washed in the laver of regeneration, and all be saved who chant to the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* To Christ God, the Son Who was begotten of the Father without corruption before time began, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

Boastful words did not issue forth from thy mouth, for thou wast humble; but, making thy heart steadfast in the Lord, thou didst accomplish mighty deeds, crying out with patience: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

As much as the infidels opposed thy words, all the more didst thou make thy spirit steadfast in the Lord, and, unafraid and without turning back, thou didst save those seeking salvation, crying: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Preaching the holiness of God, having acquired it thyself, thou didst finally move the hard-hearted to compunction and didst lead to the Lord a multitude of them, who cry out: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* All-blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos, for by thy birthgiving all men are saved from the deception of the wicked one, crying: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VII—

Thou gavest thy youth to Christ, and didst wholly dedicate thyself to Him, O glorious ­Nicholas, equal of the apostles; and, shining forth with the light of God, thou wast a beacon set upon the heights, showing forth the path of eternal life, to which, through the deep of the sea of life, thou didst lead thy many sons and daughters in the land of Japan.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Of old, on Mount Sinai, Moses beheld the back-parts of God, and in the midst of the darkness and whirlwind he was counted worthy to hear the still small voice of God; and now Symeon hath received in his arms God Who hath become immutably incarnate for our sake. And he hastened to leave things here below for life everlasting; therefore, he cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Even though at first thou didst not desire it for thyself, yet when, lifting up thine arms, in the temple of God thou didst hear the voice of the Lord calling thee, He girded thee about and led thee to struggle in a distant land.

The Lord sat upon thee as upon a mighty steed, and rode thee to Japan; and His riding was salvation for it, for He accomplished His work through thee, in thine obedience who wast divinely inspired.

“I am glad and rejoice in the Lord!” said Japan, “for in times past and even unto this day the salvation of my children hath been wrought through the apostolic labors of the holy hierarch Nicholas!”

*Theotokion:* Wrest us from the power of the dark prince of this world, O Mother of God, and by thy supplications shine forth in us the understanding of piety, and save us, granting us a place at the right hand of thy Son on the day of judgment.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

The light of God’s precepts shone forth on the land of Japan through thine apostolic ­labors, and those who live there have learned the righteousness of Christ: they have acted virtuously according to the law, and have glorified the name of God.

As thou wast mindful of the Lord amid thy tribulations, He therefore hearkened unto thee and helped thee, that thou mightest increase in number thy labors, books and the multitude of thy spiritual children.

Ungodliness ceased among thy chosen flock, and apostolic inspiration touched their hearts, for when the deacon intoned the prayers, moved wholly to compunction they prayed on their knees with lamentation before God, and with them the whole Church prayeth.

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, who bore Emmanuel in thine arms, beseech Him to send His almighty aid to His faithful, that, having God with us, we may live in piety and all honesty.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Thy guardian angel guided thee on thy thorny path. Wherefore, through the meekness of thy Christ and the wisdom of the Spirit thou didst win thine enemies over as thy friends.

The people waged war upon one another—thy flock against thy homeland; but the Prince of peace made thee wise, that thou mightest hold to reasonable measures, so that both sides praised thee.

Thou gavest rest neither to thy body nor to thy spirit, exhausting them utterly, until thou didst complete thy wondrous work, as no one before thee had done.

*Theotokion:* Neither the great serpent nor his minions can tarnish thy glory on earth and in heaven, O Mother of God, for thou gavest birth to God, and from Him hast received the grace to trample all the power of the enemy underfoot; for all things soever thou desirest, thou canst do.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

As God Thou hast rewarded the steadfast and divinely eloquent preacher of Thy Gospel, O Lord; for Thou hast preferred his labors and pangs over all the sacrifices and wholeburnt offerings of the law. Through his supplications preserve us from evil.

*Ikos:* Like David, the peer of Thine apostles, the holy hierarch Nicholas gave neither sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids, until he had translated for the Japanese all the words of the Old and New Testaments, all Thy services, and Thy theology in great measure, O Lord. And, behold! now, giving thanks for his tireless efforts, the Orthodox Church of Japan doth flourish in piety and increaseth in fullness. Wherefore, through his supplications preserve us from evil.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The children raised together in piety, disdaining the ungodly command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Burning with love for God and man, thou didst not fear the fire of the malice and hatred of perverse men; but, strengthened by God, thou didst tread thy thorny path, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Immediately on thine arrival thou didst begin to study the Japanese language, that thy tongue might not be alien to the people; and, receiving the gift of the apostles’ pentecost, thou didst achieve speedy success, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Going everywhere and casting forth seed as a sower, with faith thou didst commit it to the care of the Lord; wherefore, the field of thy labors grew beyond measure in fertility, and with the multitude of thy flock thou didst cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* We have thee as unashamed intercession before thy Son and our God, O Virgin Mother, whereby the swords of the enemy are shattered, and we receive the forgiveness of our transgressions and inherit life everlasting.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

One against thousands, thou didst go forth, unarmed save with meekness and love and the grace of Christ, and didst vanquish the enemy and lead the elect into the church of God, teaching all: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like a wise architect thou didst build the Church of Japan upon the firm rock of the Faith, for no-one can establish any other foundation than that which hath been laid by Christ. Wherefore, that which hath been established by thee for eternity doth chant: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The day came when thou wouldst go the way of all flesh, and, blessing thy people and receiving the Mysteries of Christ, thou didst reach the end of thine earthly labor, leaving all to lament thy passing; yet even after thy death thou dost instruct them to chant: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Even though thou hast died, yet thou remainest alive in the Lord, working miracles for those who have recourse to thy tomb and call upon thy name; and throughout all Japan thou dost offer up glory, crying out to Christ with a mystic voice: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The humble handmaid of God became the Queen of heaven and covereth all with her omnipotent intercession: she helpeth all who are in danger, concealeth all their offenses with her maternal love and mediateth, that all may be saved.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Ineffable is the mystery of the Virgin! For she hath been shown forth as heaven, the throne of the cherubim, and the light-bearing bridal chamber of Christ God Almighty. Her do we piously magnify as the Theotokos.

We offer incense to thee before thy precious tomb, that therewith thine entreaties for the prosperity of thy flock and great Japan may ever be upborne unto the Lord.

Having preached the one God all the days of thy life, thou wast glorified by Him with the struggle of apostleship and the gift of clairvoyance, with a holy life and eternal rewards.

On the death-bed of thy much-laboring body, all Japan, as well as thine own sovereign, honored thee; and even to the present day it honoreth thy holy memory and asketh gracious help at thy tomb.

Having the all-sweet name of Jesus ever in thy mouth and heart, thou wast aided by Him in thy work and struggles, and He hath given thee rest in the everlasting mansions after thy ­repose.

*Theotokion:* Thy glory, O Mother of God, is for now, and ever, and unto the ages of ages, unto generation of generations of men, on earth and in heaven, for the benefaction and salvation of the saved.

Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: Spec. Mel.: “Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

At the behest of the Spirit thou didst go to Japan, and, having preached the Gospel to the ungodly, thou didst acquire multitudes for Christ. Wherefore, with love they celebrate thy memory and invoke thee as their intercessor before the Lord.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast: automelon—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say; for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!” *Thrice*

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Take up in thine arms the Creator of all, O Symeon! O elder, take up Christ to Whom the Virgin Maiden gave birth without seed, unto the joy of our race!

O ye people, assembling, let us hymn the one Benefactor, the Bestower of the law, the Creator and God of the law, before Whom the multitudes of angels tremble, unto the salvation of our souls.

Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I have beheld Thee, O Christ, the preëternal Light of revelation for the gentiles and Israel, Who hast bound me in fleshly bonds.

And 3 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O all-glorious wonder! From the stones of Japanese idolatry the holy hierarch Nicholas maketh children of Abraham, renewing them by holy baptism and acquiring them for the Orthodox Church. O what a pillar of Orthodoxy hath been given to Japan! By his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, for Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

O all-glorious wonder! Having received the gift of pentecost, the holy hierarch Nicholas neither tired nor ceased until the ends of his days to translate all the books of piety into the Japanese tongue. O what a pillar of Orthodoxy hath been given to Japan! By his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, for Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

O all-glorious wonder! The righteous man, though he be prevented with death, yet shall he be at rest. Yet what sorrow and lamentation there are for the living left orphaned! When the holy hierarch Nicholas reposed all Japan grieved with sorrow at their loss. O what a pillar of Orthodoxy hath been given to Japan! By his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, for Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

The rich house of Boaz succored the poverty of Ruth, and devout Byzantium instilled Orthodoxy in pagan Bulgaria. And now Orthodox Russia, abounding exceedingly in piety, hath sent to Japan, which languished in the spirit of paganism, their own apostle Nicholas, who hath wrought wondrous things with the aid of grace; for he preached Christ to the Japanese, baptized them unto salvation, and established a firm foundation for the Church. He was to them a father, and they submitted to him like children. And, lo! the Church of Japan flourisheth now as it did before! Through his supplications, O Christ God, bestow upon it a goodly blessing, that it may prosper for all ages!

Now & ever…: Doxasticon of the feast, in Tone II—

The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the priest in the temple; and, stretching forth his hands, Symeon received Him, rejoicing, and cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord and Master, according to Thy word!”

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the feast of the Meeting, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the holy hierarch.

Prokimenon of the feast, and this one of the saint, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews §318 \(7:26-8:2\).

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. John §36\(10:9-16\).

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. “

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

