The 4th Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father Isidore of Pelusium

If this day fall outside the Great Fast, the service for the Afterfeast of the Meeting and of Saint Isidore. But if this day fall within the Great Fast, then only that of the saint.

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the afterfeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

He Who loveth mankind, fulfilling the law of the Scriptures, is now borne into the temple; and the elder Symeon receiveth Him in his arms, crying: “Now Thou lettest me depart to Thy blessedness, for today I have seen clad in mortal flesh Him Who hath dominion over life and mastery over death!”

Thou didst show Thyself to be the Light of revelation, the Sun of righteousness seated upon a light cloud, fulfilling the shadow of the law, and revealing the beginning of the new grace. Wherefore, Symeon, seeing Thee, cried out: “Set me free from corruption, for I have seen Thee today!”

Without being separated from the bosom of the Father in Thy divinity, incarnate, as Thou didst so will, Thou wast held in the embrace of the Ever-virgin, and wast given into the arms of Symeon the God-receiver, O Thou Who holdest all things in Thy hands. Wherefore, he cried aloud with joy: “Now Thou lettest me, Thy servant, depart in peace, for I have seen Thee, O Master!”

And 3 stichera of the venerable one, in the same tone, Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Elevating thyself to God by thy vision and activity, thou didst perfect thy life, O most wise one; and, setting the ascent of vision as thine activity, thou didst love the ultimate Desire, O wise one. And harboring desire for Him within thyself, thou hast now been counted worthy of a blessed end and the radiance of the threefold Sun.

With the flood of grace and the outpouring of thy words thou dost water all the divinely wise; and, setting thy mouth to the cup of the uttermost wisdom, thou didst draw forth in abundance, as from a wellspring, and hast shed beams of doctrines in every direction, sending forth epistles and teaching and instructing, O right wondrous one.

By abstinence thou didst mortify the wisdom of the flesh, arraying thyself in life-bearing mortality; and, manifestly enlarging the state of thy soul, O venerable one, thou didst make thyself a receptacle of the gifts of the Spirit and becamest the habitation of divinely inspired doctrines and dwelling-place of wisdom which passeth understanding.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Germanus, in Tone II—

Today Symeon receiveth in his arms the Lord of glory, Whom Moses beheld before in the darkness, and Who gave him the tablets on Mount Sinai. He is the Creator of the law, Who speaketh in the prophets. He it is Who filleth all with awe, Whom David proclaimeth, and hath great and rich mercy.

If this day fall within the Great Fast, then: Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion. Or if it be Wednesday or Friday, this stavrotheotokion, in the same tone & melody—

When the ewe-lamb who gave birth to Thee saw Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, she lamented and cried out to Thee maternally: “O my Son most desired, How is it that Thou art suspended upon the Tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How have Thy hands and feet been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, O Word! And how hast Thou shed Thy blood, O Master?

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Receive, O Symeon, the Lord of glory, as thou wast told by the Holy Spirit. For, lo! He is come!

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Bearing the Creator and Master as a Babe in her arms, the pure and all-pure Virgin entereth the temple.

*Stichos:* A Light of revelation to the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

Great and awesome and strange is the mystery of God’s dispensation: He Who embraceth all things and createth infants is borne in arms as a Babe.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Idiomelon, in the same tone—

The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the high priest in the temple, and Symeon, stretching forth his hands, received Him, rejoicing, and cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord, according to Thy word!”

Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

In thee, O father, that which was created in God’s image was manifestly saved; for, taking up thy cross, thou didst follow after Christ; and, laboring, thou didst teach us to disdain the flesh, in that it is transitory, but to care for the soul as a thing immortal. Wherefore, thy spirit rejoiceth with the angels, O venerable Isidore.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the venerable one; Now & ever…, that of the feast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels…”—

He Who is with the Father on the holy throne, coming to earth was born of the Virgin; He Who is unlimited by time became a babe; and Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, said, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Compassionate One, gladdening me!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before…”—

Christ our God, Who became a babe in the flesh through His Mother who knew not man, didst thou take in thine ancient arms; and thou didst gloriously receive the fulfillment of the promise that thou wouldst be able to depart, and didst teach the continual grace of miracles. Wherefore, we all glorify thee as is fitting.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, in Tone III—

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee, the glory of monastics, O father”, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Hearkening to the groaning of a contrite heart, O Master, by the supplications of Thy venerable saint, O Christ, heal Thou the grievous contrition of my soul, in that Thou art almighty.

Having entered upon active virtue through pure vision, and ever conversing with God by beauteous revelation, O God-bearing Isidore, thou wast manifestly enriched.

O all-wise one, thy mouth receiving the cup of wisdom, thou didst draw forth a stream of spiritual gifts therefrom, chanting to God a hymn of victory.

*Theotokion:* Christ the Creator, as One mighty, came upon thee on a light cloud, O pure Mistress, to cast down the idols of Egypt, in that He is omnipotent.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Having with keenness of intellect garnered knowledge of the nature of that which is, O wise and all-glorious one, thereby thou hast surely attained unto the primal Cause, as a pure theologian.

Clearly setting an instruction for mortal life, O thrice-blessed God-bearer, thou didst mortify the material causes of the passions, held fast by the desire for dispassion.

Rejoicing, thou didst follow after Christ, bearing thy cross in steadfast fasting, O father, and as far as thou wast able thou didst emulate Him in purity of life.

*Theotokion:* Giving birth to the Master in ­manner transcending the laws of nature, O Virgin Theotokos, thou didst abolish the ancient curse of disobedience, pouring forth a spring of blessing.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Church, finding thee to be another morning-star, O all glorious one, crieth out to thee, illumined by the lightning-flashes of thy words: Rejoice, O most blessed and divinely wise Isidore!

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

To the all-holy Spirit thou didst appear as a book written with a wealth of understanding of the doctrine of the Faith, revealing things divine to those in need and laying up life for those who desire it. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Having risen…”—

Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who with the Father art equally without beginning, and wast borne into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder took Thee in his arms, crying: “Now dost Thou let me depart, whom Thou hast visited, according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the human race!”

But if this day fall during the Great Fast: Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only most pure Virgin Mother, who hast surpassed the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications cleanse me, who more than all others am dust and am defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, and grant me great mercy.

Or, if it be Wednesday or Friday: Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Submitting to Christ unreservedly, O venerable one, as a right dutiful servant thou didst distribute the wealth given thee, and the Master hath counted thee worthy of ineffable joy.

Traversing the deep of wisdom, like a good merchant thou didst obtain the goodly Pearl, and hast jealously cherished Him alone as thy treasure.

Illumined by the divine Spirit, like the sun thou hast emitted beams of discourse upon all, desiring the salvation of the faithful, O thou who art revealed of God.

*Theotokion:* Truly, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, the mysteries of thy birthgiving to God are ineffable and unapproachable to those on earth and in heaven.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Being outside the body through the mortification of the passions, O most wise one, with love thou didst draw nigh to God, the all-holy and all-radiant Light, Who alone requireth purity.

Illumining his mind with Thy divine radiance, O Good One, the God-bearer became a most luminous pillar, sending forth upon all the divine rays of God’s light and dispelling the darkness of ignorance.

He Who desireth that all be saved, in that He is good, showed thee to be a guide for the lost, to turn many to the path of salvation, O most wise and thrice-blessed Isidore, all-rich father.

*Theotokion:* With mouth and soul, O good Mistress of the world, I confess thee truly to be the one who gave birth to God incarnate, O pure and most immaculate one, and with faith I set thee forth as the intercessor of my life.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

As a priest adorned with judicious words, thou didst judge rationally, with body and soul, reasonably making that which is baser subject to what is higher, O right wondrous God-bearer.

O glorious boast of monastics, with the blows of asceticism thou didst right mightily smite the passions and sustenance of Egypt, subjecting them to hard testing, smoothing the way for the faithful.

*Theotokion:* He Who beareth all things by His divine power and upholdeth them in his hands, in that He is compassionate, O all-pure one, is carried, incarnate, as a babe, though He is of the same essence as the Father.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The Master hath set thee in the firmament of the Faith like a sun, O father, to illumine with noetic radiance the souls of those who cry out earnestly: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

With the outpourings of thy tears thou didst wash away defilement of the flesh and spirit, O God-bearer, and as a light for those on earth thou hast taught all to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Standing upon the immovable foundation of the Faith, O pure Mother of God, we confess thee to be the Theotokos; for without seed thou hast given birth to the Word of God for us. Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O all-pure one!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the ­disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Thou didst offer up thy whole life as a reasonable sacrifice of sweet savor, O father, unto Christ Who hung suspended upon the Cross for thy sake. Him do we exalt supremely for all ages.

Even after thy death thou dost increase thy wealth, leaving thine animate discourses as an inheritance of great worth to all the faithful who exalt Christ supremely for all ages.

Thou didst adorn thyself with the beauty of thy discourses, O all-blessed one; for thou wast shown to be the pen of the Holy Spirit, piously expressing the mind of God in writing for those who exalt Christ supremely for all ages.

*Theotokion:* I flee to thy protection, O most immaculate one, and put thee forward now as the intercessor for my life, who, in manner past understanding, gavest birth to God the Word, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Like a ray of light hath the discourse of grace shone forth in thy soul, O venerable one; and through thee all the earth hath been filled with the splendor thereof. Partaking of it, O father, we marvel at the treasure of thy wisdom.

Following the doctrines of the fathers, with divine wisdom thou didst teach theologians to worship the uncreated, unoriginate Trinity, the three Persons in Unity of nature, Who poureth forth enlightenment upon all the faithful.

Having found the reward of thy labors in the heavens and received life everlasting, O all-wise and blessed Isidore, as thou standest now with the angels before the throne of God ask salvation for those who hymn thy memory.

*Theotokion:* The incorrupt Word of God, taking upon Himself a corruptible form, hath clothed men in incorruption, making His abode within thee, O joyous one, at the Father’s good pleasure. Wherefore, O all-pure one, with the armies of heaven we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion of the feast—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say; for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!” *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

At the aposticha, stichera of the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Christ is born of the Virgin, a stranger to defilement, in that He was begotten incorruptibly of the Father, the Sun Who existed before the morning-star, Who delivereth Adam.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Open wide, ye gates of heaven! For Christ is offered to God the Father in the temple, as a babe, by His Virgin Mother.

*Stichos:* A Light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of His people Israel.

Christ Who appeared as a burning coal to the divine Isaiah is now given to the elder by the hands of the Theotokos, as with tongs.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VII—

Thou hast come from heaven to earth, O our Savior, as a light of revelation to the gentiles, and, having come forth from the Virgin, thou hast given rest to the righteous Symeon; for it was fitting that Thou, O Bestower of life upon all, be recognized by the elder, in that Thou didst come to let him depart, according to Thy word, O Thou Who hast great mercy.

