Also on The 5th Day of the Month of February

Afterfeast of the Meeting of Our Lord

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints, Theodosius, Archbishop of Chernigov,

Wonderworker of all Russia

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside...”—

Thy most radiant feast hath dawned like the sun, O divinely wise Theodosius, summoning the people to gladness and illumining all with rays of joy; for in thee hath the glory of Christ, the glory of the Orthodox Church, been revealed, shining forth with wondrous miracles. Wherefore, with love we cry to thee: Pray for us ever, O most sacred father! *Twice*

When the time appointed by God before had come, then did God, Who is wondrous in His saints, glorify thee, for truly the wonder is most glorious: for many years hath thy body remained incorrupt, and now it hath been shown to be a source of healings for all who have recourse to thee with love. Glory to Him Who gave thee strength! Glory to Him Who crowned thee! Glory to Him Who worketh healings for all through thee!

Now doth the land of Russia radiantly hold chorus, glorifying thy holy memory, O holy hierarch, father Theodosius, for it hath found in thee a new intercessor and a fervent advocate at the throne of God, a speedy aid amid misfortune and a physician for the ailing that taketh no fee. Glory to Him Who hath given thee the gift of healing! Glory to Him Who hath glorified thee! Glory to Him Who doth glorify His holy Church through thee!

Glory..., in the same tone and melody—

With hymns let us praise today the most glorious wonderworker, whom Christ hath bestowed upon His Church, setting forth the truth of our Orthodox Faith to the reproof of those who meditate vain things and for the instruction of those who have gone astray. Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, most radiant star in the heavens of the Church! Rejoice, wondrous boast of the land of Russia! Rejoice, ready and prayerful comforter of the ailing and the sorrowful! Rejoice, thou fervent intercessor for our souls!

Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of Andrew of Crete: Idiomelon, in Tone IV—

Today the sacred Mother, who is more exalted than the holy place, hath entered into the sanctuary, showing forth to the world the Law-giver and Creator of the law. And the elder Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, cried out, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, for I have seen Thee, the Savior of our souls!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephrata...”—

Thou hast been shown to be the dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, O most blessed father Theodosius, having cleansed thy soul and body of the passions and adorned thyself with love and humility, as a fit habitation for Him.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O father Theodosius, thou boast of holy hierarchs and glory of monastics, standing before the throne of the all-holy Trinity pray thou unceasingly in behalf of our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Hearken unto the supplications of thy children who have recourse to thee in love, O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, and grant the heartfelt petitions of those who honor thy holy memory.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, who can recount the labors which thou didst undertake for the sake of the love of Christ? For by fasting, vigil and ceaseless prayer thou didst slay the arrogance of the flesh; and by humility, patience and love for thy neighbor thou didst prepare thyself as an abode for the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, thou dwellest now in the mansions of heaven, where, now making thine abode, do thou ever pray in behalf of our souls.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in Tone V—

The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother, fulfilling the prescription of His own law; and, receiving Him, Symeon said: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, thou wast a beacon to thy flock; then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. Pray thou at the throne of the King of glory, that He deliver us from the evils which assail us and save our souls, O holy one, by thine intercessions.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Let us now celebrate the saving grace of the ineffable manifestation of God; for Christ God, becoming immutably a child through the Virgin Maiden, is now borne by His Mother unto God the Father in the temple; and Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, embraceth Him.

Thou wast seen by the prophets, O Jesus, for of old they beheld Thee as far as they were able; but now, O Word of God, of Thine own will Thou hast appeared in the flesh, through the Virgin Mary, to all the world and hast revealed Thy salvation to all who are descended from Adam, in that Thou lovest mankind.

O Christ Who of old ordained the law of Mount Sinai, fulfilling the provisions of the law now on Mount Sion Thou hast desired to be borne into the temple, a babe in the flesh, in the arms of the Theotokos, with the whole-burnt offerings; and wast given into the arms of Symeon.

And 5 stichera of the saint, in Tone II—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, though thou hast finished thy course in secret struggles, yet the wondrous fragrance of thy humility, beloved of God, cannot be hid. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be a most radiant lamp which hath not been hidden beneath a bushel, but hath been set upon the lampstand of the Church of God and glorified by God, Whom do thou entreat in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, though thou wast elevated to a hierarchal throne as a man full of grace, yet didst thou preserve the simplicity of monastic life, remaining in goodly obedience to thy spiritual father, and showing to all an example of humility, following the example of the Lord Jesus, Whom do thou entreat in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

O divinely wise father Theodosius, though thou wast not long a pastor of the Church of Christ, yet didst thou acquire the great love of thy flock, embracing all in thy love, comforting the sorrowful and making haste to assist the orphaned and the widowed. Wherefore, even after thy blessed repose, the sorrowful and ailing, having recourse to thee as to one who is alive, receive an abundance of grace, glorifying Christ God, Who is wondrous in His saints, Whom do thou entreat in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O man of God and faithful servant, minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, chosen vessel of the Holy Spirit, pillar and ground of the Church, heir of the kingdom: Cease thou never to pray for us to the Lord!

Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone—

Let the gates of heaven be opened today; for the unoriginate Word of the Father, receiving a beginning under time, without abandoning His divinity, is of His own will borne by His Virgin Mother into the temple of the law as a babe forty days old. And Symeon taketh Him in his arms, crying: “Let Thy servant depart, O Master, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the world to save the human race, glory be to Thee!”

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. And three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone II—

When thou didst pass over from earthly things to those of heaven, O holy hierarch Theodosius our father, then did God, Who is wondrous in His saints, bestow upon thee the grace of healing; for thou didst appear to the ailing hierarch John and, commanding him to celebrate the liturgy on the morrow, didst straightway restore him to health. Wherefore, joyously bowing down before thy relics, with compunction he cried out: Glory to Him Who doth glorify His saints!

O holy hierarch, thou dost intercede for all who have recourse to thy protection with faith, for thou art shown to be a comforter amid sorrows, a gracious physician amidst afflictions, a most wise guide on the path of salvation, and a most fervent intercessor for all before God. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory with love we cry to thee, as to our most merciful father: Pray thou in our behalf, O holy hierarch Theodosius!

Glory..., in Tone III—

Through thee did God make manifest marvelous and most glorious wonders, O father Theodosius, when it was His good pleasure to glorify thy precious and much-healing relics; for the blind regained their sight, the dumb waxed eloquent, paralytics and the lame were cured, and the name of God was glorified by all; for in thee hath the Lord visited the land of Russia, and through thee have we beheld the mighty works of God. Wherefore, reverently honoring thy holy memory, we fall down before thee and entreat thee: Pray thou for the salvation of our souls!

Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone I—

Today, He Who gave the law to Moses on Sinai submitteth to the commands of the law, having become like us for our sake, in that He is full of loving-kindness. Now our pure God, as a holy Infant, having opened the womb of the pure one, is offered to Himself, as God, freeing our souls from the curse of the law and enlightening them.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice, thou life-bearing Cross...”—

Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theodosius, most glorious adornment of the Church of Russia, radiant boast of the city of Chernigov, unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy, who wast glorified by God for the reproof of the arrogance of the ungodly, and wast revealed as a worker of wonders! Rejoice, O our new intercessor before God! Standing ever before Him with all the saints, pray thou for the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O sacred one, divinely wise guide of monks, who didst love Christ from thy youth, and Whose easy yoke thou didst bear with joy! Rejoice, thou who leadest all to God, not only by word, but also by deed and the example of thy life! Standing now before Him, pray thou in behalf of thy children who honor thy holy memory with faith and love, O holy hierarch Theodosius our father!

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Rejoice, O hierarch of God, who wast adorned with the beauty of the episcopal rank and dost shine forth in virtue! Rejoice, O mirror of humility, splendid model of meekness and guilelessness and inexhaustible treasury of love! Rejoice, thou who even after thy repose didst not forsake thy flock, but dost ever benefit it, and showest thyself to be a father who loveth his children! Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we flee unto thee, as to our father, and cry out to thee with love: Pray for us, O our father, that our souls may be saved!

Glory..., in the same tone—

Come, ye Christian people, and with hymns let us crown the new and most marvelous worker of wonders whom Christ, Who is wondrous in His saints, hath glorified and bestowed upon the land of Russia as a fervent intercessor. Rejoice, O Theodosius, our father, ready comforter amid our sorrows! Rejoice, most merciful physician of the afflicted! Rejoice, thou who art ready to ask of the Lord those things which lead to salvation for each and every one! And now, standing before the throne of His majesty, as a good and faithful servant of the Lord summoned to the joy of thy Master, entreat Him for the salvation of our souls.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in Tone II—

The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the high priest in the temple, and Symeon, stretching forth his hands, received Him, rejoicing, and cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord, according to Thy word!”

At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, thou wast a beacon to thy flock; then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. Pray thou at the throne of the King of glory, that He deliver us from the evils which assail us and save our souls, O holy one, by thine intercessions. *Twice*

And that of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection. *Once*

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory..., that of the saint; Now and ever..., that of the feast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

As of old the ailing were cured by touching the hem of Christ’s garment, and as the handkerchiefs and aprons of Paul healed incurable diseases, so also are many of the sick now healed on touching the vestments wherewith thy relics have been clothed, O holy hierarch Theodosius. Wherefore, rejoicing and glorifying God, with love we cry out to thee: By thy supplications heal thou also our diseases of body and soul, O most blessed one!

Glory..., Now and ever..., Sessional hymn of the feast: Automelon, in Tone I—

Let the choir of the angels marvel at the wonder! And let us mortals lift up our voices in hymnody, beholding the ineffable condescension of God; for He Who alone loveth mankind, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, do the arms of the elder now embrace.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

As a forthright witness to the truth before those who abound in heresy and trouble simple souls hath Christ shown thee forth in His Church, for thou hast vanquished the superstition of men not by words, but by the incorruption of thy relics, confirming the holy Faith with many signs and wonders, O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, to the joy and salvation of all who honor thy holy memory and cry out to God: Glory to Him Who doth glorify His saints!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ pipes…”—

Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who with the Father art equally without beginning, and hast been borne into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder took Thee in his arms, crying: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, whom Thou hast visited according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the human race!”

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Theodosius, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf!

Selected Psalm—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now and ever...,

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

Even after thy repose thou art truly shown to be a pastor and father, and a grace-filled guide, O Theodosius, our father; for, appearing to the afflicted in dreams, thou dost teach them to honor the Church of God and her divine precepts, to partake of the Mysteries of God for health of soul, and to offer up supplications unto the all-pure Mother of God. With her do thou ever pray for the salvation of our souls.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: Joseph marveled…”—

Thou didst become a babe for my sake, O Ancient of days, and didst partake of purification, O most pure God, that Thou mightest assure me of the flesh Thou didst receive from the Virgin. And Symeon, taught thereby, recognized Thee as God appearing in the flesh, and the elder kissed Thee, our Life, and, rejoicing, cried out: “Release me, for I have seen Thee, the Life of all!”

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \(10:9-16\).

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good Shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, favorite of God and co-communicant of Christ, as is thy name, so also was thy life; for in offering the whole of thyself unto God as a gift, thou wast truly shown to be a gift of God to the Russian land. Glorious was thy life, and thy repose is with the saints. Pray thou for our souls!

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Joyously the elder embraceth Christ”, the composition of Cosmas of Maïuma, in Tone III—

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Accept this praise offered thee by unworthy lips, and by thy fervent prayers to God grant peace unto those who honor thy holy memory, O Theodosius, our father!

From thy youth thou didst love the Lord, preserving thy purity undefiled; from childhood didst thou cleave to Him with thy pure soul, keeping thy heart in simplicity and guilelessness. Wherefore, thou wast truly a child of God, O holy Theodosius.

It is good for a man when he beareth the yoke in his youth, saith the Scriptures. Following this saying, with joy didst thou take up the yoke of the Lord from thy youth, and didst become an exemplary monk, O blessed Theodosius.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Virgin Mother of God, our hope unashamed: save us, hearken unto us who are cruelly held fast by the passions, and grant us a helping hand by thine intercessions.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: Establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, Confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, saith the Lord. Heeding this salvific word, thou didst strive to acquire poverty of spirit more than all other virtues, O venerable one, loving it as a mighty defense against every temptation and as the God-loving mother of all virtues.

Knowing that humility is born of obedience and dispassion of humility, thou didst love obedience with all thy heart, cutting down evil thoughts in all things by thy will. Wherefore, thou didst attain even unto dispassion, having prepared thy soul as a pure habitation for the all-holy Spirit.

Thou didst acquire great meekness, O divinely wise Theodosius, courageously enduring all tribulations, and lovingly covering every offense and abasement with silence. Wherefore, thou hast received an inheritance in the land of the living, where the righteous dwell forever, glorifying the Lord Jesus.

*Theotokion:* We have no boldness before thy Son and God, O all-holy Mistress; nor would we have boldness before thee, ever defiled as we are by sins, O all-immaculate and most merciful Mother, were thou not to summon us, the errant, to repentance, driving from us all despondency and indifference with the hope of salvation.

Kontakion, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Thou wast shown to be a grace-bearing beacon, O Theodosius our father, resplendent with the serene light of humility, illumining us with thy love. Wherefore, honoring thy memory with love, we cry to thee: Pray for us, O holy hierarch of God, thou wonderworker newly revealed!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled…”—

Of old, on Mount Sinai, Moses beheld the back-parts of God, and in the midst of the darkness and whirlwind he was counted worthy to hear the still small voice of God; and now Symeon hath received in his arms God Who hath become immutably incarnate for our sake. And he hastened to leave things here below for life everlasting; therefore, he cried out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the prophet Habbakuk I cry to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Weighed down by illness and exhausted by old age, the archpastor Lazarus first made thee his concelebrant and afterwards his successor, O holy hierarch Theodosius, and a beacon to the Church of Chernigov. By thy prayers illumine it forever!

Truly thou wast shown to be worthy of a hierarch’s honor and authority, O father Theodosius, being most wise of word, virtuous of life, learned in the divine Scriptures and exceeding content to guide the rational sheep.

Adorned with piety and renowned amongst all the people of the land of Chernigov for thy spiritual life, thou wast unanimously chosen by them for the great ministry of the Church of God, O father Theodosius. By thy prayers do thou now watch over it!

*Theotokion:* The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, saith James, the brother of the Lord; and the prayer of the holy hierarch Theodosius also availeth much, rendered effectual by thy maternal supplication, O all-holy Theotokos and Mistress; for thou art our intercession, protection and help, O gracious one.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou thrust me from Thy countenance, O never-waning Light? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I entreat Thee!

The people of the city of Chernigov rejoiced, beholding thee vested in the splendor of the hierarchal rank, standing before the throne of the grace of God with their archpastor Lazarus, lifting up thy venerable hands in behalf of thy flock and giving thanks unto Christ. And their hearts were moved to compunction.

In life, love and spirit, faith and purity wast thou an example to all the flock entrusted thee by God. Wherefore, it was not only thine own sheep that cleaved unto thee with love, but even the heterodox honored thee as a man of God, O Theodosius our father.

Thou wast truly a shepherd to thy rational flock, ready to lay down thy life for thy sheep, O holy hierarch Theodosius. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be an invincible champion of the oppressed, a fearless zealot reproving the mighty of this world with love and paternally instructing thy flock, most wisely guiding the erring to the right path.

*Theotokion:* Grant life unto my slain soul; raise it up, for it is fallen; heal it, for it is wounded. Enlighten my mind; still the waves of temptations, O Mother of God, all-holy Virgin, and save me through thine intercessions, O most pure one.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief, for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Being an exemplary monk from thy youth, thou didst lovingly found monastic habitations and there didst set everything in good order for the good of monastic life, ever guiding all to God with thy paternal instructions, O divinely wise Theodosius our father.

Most beautifully fashioning of thy soul a temple for the Spirit of God by thy virtues, thou didst love the splendor of the house of God; and taking most diligent care therefor, thou didst also erect newer temples to the glory of God the Creator Who hath beautifully adorned the whole world with ineffable comeliness.

With angelic joy didst thou rejoice, O holy hierarch of God, when thou didst behold thy children walking in the truth; and as a father who loveth his children thou didst pray for the salvation of all, embracing all with thy love and interceding for all, O holy hierarch Theodosius our father.

*Theotokion:* Come, all ye faithful, let us fall down before the Mother of God, the fervent intercessor for our race; and in compunction of heart let us cry aloud: O Mistress, all-holy Theotokos, shelter us beneath thy gracious protection and deliver us from all evil by thine intercessions.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

O holy hierarch Theodosius, for Christ the Chief Shepherd didst thou labor, nurturing thy rational sheep in the spiritual pasture; and from Christ God didst thou receive the gift of healing to cure the spiritual and bodily infirmities of all who with faith have recourse to thy healing relics. Wherefore, pray thou now, O holy one, that all who call upon thy name may be saved from the assaults of the enemy, and that our souls may find mercy.

*Ikos:* God’s gift to the land of Russia hast thou truly been shown to be, O holy Theodosius, for, having offered thyself to God from thy youth, thou didst fight the good fight until the end and didst receive great gifts, being a chosen vessel of grace. Wherefore, as in thy life, and yet moreso after thy blessed repose, thou dost lift up thy venerable hands with boldness, standing before the throne of the all-holy Trinity, praying fervently for thy flock and for the whole Russian land. Thus, having recourse unto thee with faith and love, all that sorrow receive consolation abundantly and the ailing are vouchsafed healing. With them we also cry out to thee, as to a father who loveth his children: Pray for those who call upon thy name, O holy one, that our souls be saved from the assaults of the enemy!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod upon the flame and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ever meditating upon the memory of death, it was thy desire to keep the Cross of the Lord continually before thine eyes, and the depiction thereof was with thee as an inseparable companion even while thou didst journey, that thou mightest ever cry out to the Lord from thy heart: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Even after death thou dost, through the grace of God, remain with thy children as one who is alive; and after thy repose thou art shown to be a good shepherd unto them, O father Theodosius, in visions during sleep guiding those who are ignorant of the Faith, and teaching all to cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst command the ailing monk to go to the church of God and to pray, O father Theodosius, standing before him in a dream; and instructing him paternally, thou didst remind him of his sins, calling him to repentance; and thou didst grant him healing, that he might continually glorify the Lord, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* My mind dissipated, my heart hath waxed gross and my will is grown feeble. O Mistress Theotokos, take pity upon me, a sinner; heal thou my soul, and save me, for thou art the good Mother of my good Savior, that I might continually cry out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Him Who sitteth upon the throne of glory and is unceasingly glorified as God, O ye angels and heavens bless, hymn and exalt supremely forever!

Who can declare all thy wonders as is meet, O holy hierarch Theodosius? For thou dost show thyself to be a peerless physician even unto the ailing who seek thee not, and thou dost call upon all to confess the glory of God Who doth glorify His saints and is exalted supremely forever!

Thou hast shown thyself to be a helper and refuge for those who are afflicted by unclean spirits, O holy hierarch Theodosius, with the power of God driving all demonic activity away from those who with faith have recourse to thy relics, that the name of God may be glorified forever.

Thy name, O holy hierarch Theodosius, poured forth like myrrh, is wafted, like the fragrance of God’s paradise, over the face of all the land of Russia, delighting the hearts of the faithful and moving them to hymn in spiritual joy the Lord Who is exalted supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* Disdain not the supplications of thy servants, O Mother of God. Accept our prayers, for the sake of the holy hierarch Theodosius who was pleasing unto thee, and bear them to the throne of thy Son and God, that His name may be glorified by all creation forever.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* With unceasing glorification we magnify thee, the Mother of the Most High, who knewest not wedlock, who didst truly give birth unto God the Word in manner which passeth understanding and art more highly exalted than the powers most pure.

As a most merciful healer, O holy Theodosius, thou dost not only mercifully heed the afflicted who call upon thee, but dost hearken to their continual petitions, and according to their faith dost show thyself to be a ready physician for the sick, having mercy on and comforting all, and pouring forth most abundantly thy compassion upon all.

Truly marvelous and beyond recounting are thy wonders, O Theodosius our father; for thou hast shown thyself to be the glory of the Church of Russia, a heavenly preacher of the Orthodox Faith and a steadfast witness to the Truth.

O holy one of God, favorite of Christ, inexhaustible treasury of mercy: Look thou down upon my infirmities; heal my soul which is badly tempest-tossed by the passions; heal thou my body also which is beset by weaknesses, that in thee I may glorify the grace and loving-kindness of Christ God Who is wondrous in His saints.

*Theotokion:* To thee do I offer my sinful heart, O most merciful Mother. Before thee do I cast the weakness of my soul and my body. By thy prayers do thou help and have mercy upon me!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars...”—

He that adorned heaven with stars hath revealed thee, O holy hierarch Theodosius, as a new and most radiant star adorning the heaven of the Church and driving away the darkness of the arrogance of the impious. Wherefore, enlighten thou our souls, which are darkened by sin, and guide us toward repentance by thy prayers, O venerable one.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Exapostilarion of the feast—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say; for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!” *Thrice*

At the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Holding the Master in his arms with fear and joy, Symeon asked to be released from life, hymning the Theotokos.

Symeon cried aloud: “Now let me depart unto true life, O my Savior; for I have seen Thee, O Master, the Light of the world!”

The chaste and venerable Anna, hath now confessed in prophecy Him Who sprang forth from the Virgin for the deliverance of mortals.

And 3 stichera of the saint, in Tone VI—

O our most blessed and God-bearing father Theodosius, disdaining the beauties of this world and its fleeting pleasures, thou didst love the monastic life and didst join the choir of the angels. Wherefore, in thy miracles thou dost wondrously shine forth upon the whole world as a most radiant beacon. Pray thou therefore for us who keep thy holy memory, for we are thy children and the sheep of thy rational flock. We call upon thee for aid, asking that through thee we may receive peace and great mercy.

O divinely wise and most blessed Theodosius, thou didst subject all the pride of thy flesh to thy soul. Cleansing thyself by fasting and secret struggles, thou wast shown to shine like gold tried in the crucible, becoming a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit. Bringing good order to monastic habitations and magnificently adorning the churches of God, didst thou tend well thy rational sheep, leading them up to the heights of the virtues by thy teachings as by a ladder. Remember us who honor thine ever-sacred memory, and pray thou that our souls be saved.

Thou didst shine upon us thy God-pleasing life, O most glorious Theodosius, instructing us with the virtue beloved of God; for in thyself didst thou manifest to all a rule of faith and a model of abstinence, and an inexhaustible treasury of love and humility. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, we glorify Christ Who hath crowned thee. Him do thou beseech for the salvation of our souls.

Glory..., in Tone II—

What shall we offer unto Thee, O Christ our God? How shall we worthily hymn Thy compassion, which Thou dost pour forth most abundantly upon us, the unworthy? We are blessed, being children of Thine Orthodox Church, wherein, as in days of old, Thou dost even now show forth wondrous and most glorious miracles, glorifying Thy saints. And, lo! we now radiantly celebrate a new and most marvelous wonderworker, whom Thou hast been well-pleased to glorify! We glorify Thy name, O Lord our God. We bow down before the greatness of Thy goodness, and, falling prostrate, cry out to Thee: Through the prayers of the holy hierarch Theodosius, have mercy upon us!

Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI—

O Christ our God, Whose good pleasure it was to sit today in the arms of the elder, as in the chariot of the cherubim: in that Thou lovest mankind, deliver and save us who hymn Thee, calling us forth from the tyranny of the passions.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IV of the festal canon, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335 \(13: 17-21\)

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \(6: 17-23\)

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

