The 5th Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Agatha

of Palermo in Sicily

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Theodosius of Chernigov\)

If this day fall outside the Great Fast, the service for the Afterfeast of the Meeting and of the martyr. But if this day fall within the Great Fast, then only that of the martyr.

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, stichera of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Let us now celebrate the saving grace of the ineffable manifestation of God; for Christ God, becoming immutably a child through the Virgin Maiden, is now borne by His Mother unto God the Father in the temple; and Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, embraceth Him.

Thou wast seen by the prophets, O Jesus, for of old they beheld Thee as far as they were able; but now, O Word of God, of Thine own will Thou hast appeared in the flesh, through the Virgin Mary, to all the world and hast revealed Thy salvation to all who are descended from Adam, in that Thou lovest mankind.

O Christ Who of old ordained the law of Mount Sinai, fulfilling the provisions of the law now on Mount Sion Thou hast desired to be borne into the temple, a babe in the flesh, in the arms of the Theotokos, with the whole-burnt offerings; and wast given into the arms of Symeon.

And these stichera of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Thou didst preserve thy body uncorrupted for Christ thy Bridegroom, adorned with the beauties of virginity, O Agatha, bride of God; and, luminous with the splendors of martyrdom, thou hast made thine abode in the bridal-chamber of God. Wherefore, we celebrate thy universal triumph, glorifying the Savior Who ever glorifieth thee.

Thou didst endure the severing of thy breasts, the burning of fire and the laceration of thy body, O glorious one, gazing with the eyes of thy heart toward thine eternal reward, the blessedness which cometh therefrom and the imperishable crown, which hath now been given thee by Christ, for Whom thou didst suffer, O much suffering athlete.

The uncontrollable raging of the savage fire didst thou halt by thy supplications, O thou of goodly renown, and thou didst save the city which doth venerate thy precious relics, O martyr, from whence it receiveth rivers of healings through the divine Spirit. For, suffering therein, thou didst bring low the enemy and didst receive the crown of victory, O most lauded one.

If this day fall outside the Great Fast, we chant:

Glory…, the composition of the Sykeote, in Tone VIII—

An all-glorious miracle took place during the martyrdom of the most glorious Agatha, the martyr of Christ God, like unto that of Moses. For, obtaining the law of the people, on the mountain he received letters inscribed by God on tablets; but here an angel from heaven, an intelligence venerable and acting freely, brought an inscribed scroll to her grave, showing forth honor from God and deliverance for her native land.

Now & ever…, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in the same tone—

He Who is borne upon the cherubim and is hymned by the seraphim, borne into the temple of God today in accordance with the law, sitteth in the arms of the elder as on a throne, and as God receiveth gifts from Joseph: a pair of turtle-doves — the undefiled Church and the people newly-chosen from among the gentiles; and two young pigeons — the Ruler of the Old and the New. And Symeon, finally receiving the fulfillment of the promise made to him and blessing the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, foretold in imagery the sufferings she would endure and asked from God deliverance, crying out: “Now let me depart, O Master, as Thou didst tell me before; for I have seen Thee, the preëternal Light, the Savior and Lord of the Christian people!”

But if this day fall within the Great Fast: Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

Take pity, O Mistress, upon me who am brought low by the assaults of the demons, and have been cast down into the pit of destruction; and set me firmly upon the rock of the virtues, fending off the attacks of the enemy. Vouchsafe that I may obey the commandments of thy Son and our God, that I may receive remission on the Day of Judgment.

Or this stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

Beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, His side pierced by a spear, the all-pure one cried out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? What have the thankless people done to Thee in return for the good Thou hast done for them? Thou makest haste to leave me childless, O most Loving One. I marvel at Thy voluntary crucifixion, O Compassionate One!”

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Receive in thine arms, O Symeon, the Creator of all things! O elder, take up Christ, to Whom the Virgin Maiden gave birth without seed, unto the joy of our race.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Assembling, O ye people, let us hymn God, the Creator of the law, before Whom the multitudes of angels tremble, the only Benefactor and Bestower of the law, for the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* A light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I have beheld Thee, the preëternal Light of revelation for the nations and Israel, O Christ, and of my bodily union.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Andrew Pyrrhus, in Tone II—

Him to Whom the ministers on high pray with trembling, Symeon now taketh into his material arms here below. He announced that God hath united Himself to men, and, seeing God as a ­heavenly man, cried out with joy at being separated from those on earth: “O Lord Who revealest the never-waning light to those in darkness, glory be to Thee!”

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

Thy ewe-lamb Agatha crieth out to Thee with a loud voice, O Jesus: “I love Thee, O my Bridegroom, and, seeking Thee, I pass through many struggles: I am crucified and buried with Thee in Thy baptism, and suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; I die for Thee, that I might live with Thee. As an unblemished sacrifice accept me, who sacrifice myself with love for Thee!” By her supplications save our souls, in that Thou art merciful.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection.

AT MATINS

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, automelon, in Tone I—

Let the choir of the angels marvel at the wonder! And let us mortals lift up our voices in hymnody, beholding the ineffable condescension of God; for He Who alone lovest mankind, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, do the arms of the elder now embrace.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ pipes…”—

Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who with the Father art equally without beginning, and hast been borne into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder took Thee in his arms, crying: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, whom Thou hast visited according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the human race!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 8 troparia, including its irmos; and that of the martyr, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “With goodly hymns I hymn the good one”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Desiring the first Cause of good things, thou wast granted a name of goodly renown, of ineffable forethought, O martyr, signifying beforehand the goodness of thy character.

Having disdained carnal-mindedness, O pure one, thou wast taken up to the all-splendid life, gazing steadily at thy most desired Bridegroom.

As a bride of Christ thou wast adorned with divine goodness and the beauty of virginity, O glorious one, and thou art crowned with thy divine blood of honorable martyrdom as with a twofold crown.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, thou wast a habitation fit for God, more spacious and pure than the heavens; and now the choir of virgins rejoiceth in thee.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

O martyr Agatha, thou bright and most beauteous glory and flower of the divine martyrs, healing the affliction of my soul, do thou adorn it.

Thou didst illumine thyself with thy native virtues, O Agatha, and, spurning transitory things and loving the kingdom of God, thou didst call thyself a martyr.

Attracted by divine desire, O Agatha, thou didst prefer Christ to all beautiful things, and didst right boldly and manfully trample the savagery of the tormenters underfoot.

*Theotokion:* O pure Bride of God, entreat God to Whom thou gavest birth, that He deliver those who hymn thee from trials and evil circumstances, from sufferings and tribulations, O most blessed one.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Let the Church be adorned today with a glorious robe of purple dyed in the pure blood of the martyr Agatha, crying out: Rejoice, O boast of Catania!

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Adorned with the glory of the Faith, with piety, reverence and virginity, and with zeal for suffering, thou wast called a venerable intellect, with a will of thine own, who, as the bride of God, dost pray that true worship be given to God, deliverance to thy homeland, and great mercy unto us.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone—

Rejoicing, the sacred Symeon embraced Thee Who wast incarnate of the Virgin, O Christ, crying out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master!” And Anna, the blameless and glorious prophetess, now offereth Thee confession and hymnody. And we cry out to Thee, O Bestower of Life: Glory to Thee Who hast thus been well pleased!

But if this day fall within the Great Fast:

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, the one Lord remained God when He became man, taking on flesh in thy womb; and even after thou gavest birth, He preserved thee, His Mother, a Virgin, immaculate as thou wast before giving birth. Entreat Him earnestly, that He grant us great mercy.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the undefiled Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who had sprung forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

The mindlessness of the lying serpent is put to shame and denounced; for virgins now trample his savagery underfoot, since Christ hath shone forth from the Virgin and illumined all.

Keeping thy lawful chastity undefiled, O athlete, rejoicing thou didst cast down the spirits of wickedness, armed with the grace of Christ, taking up His Cross upon thy shoulders.

Be thou mine intercessor, O most wise one, rescuing me from evils and temptations, from tempest and tribulation, and deliver me from the violence of the enemy, that, set free, I may hymn thee as my good intercessor, O thou of goodly renown.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst immeasurably surpass the angelic hosts in splendor, O all-pure one, having ineffably given birth to Christ, the noetic Sun, Who illumineth the thoughts of the faithful with rays of divinity.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Guided by the divine commandments, O glorious Agatha, thou wast symbolically loosed from the bonds of passionate carnal attachment, and shown to be a fruitful olive-tree.

Gazing, full of love for Christ, upon most splendid radiance, thou didst spurn the pleasures which drag one downwards, desiring the beauty of Him alone.

That thou mayest be counted worthy to behold the ineffable life of the elect, O glorious one, thou didst mightily endure tortures, rejoicing, O most lauded Agatha.

*Theotokion:* To thee who gavest birth to Christ, the Creator of all, we cry aloud: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, O thou who hast shone forth the Light upon us! Rejoice, thou who hast contained the Infinite One!

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Being vain-minded, the tyrant hoped to abduct thee, the beautiful virgin; but the shameless one was repulsed, dashing himself against thy firm resolve.

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O martyr of goodly fame; for thou didst openly and manifestly denounce the shameless one, having been enriched with discourse taught thee by God.

Possessing a venerable mind with free will, O most lauded one, thou wast shown to be a most precious stone, O honored Agatha, becoming the sure deliverance of thy native land.

*Theotokion:* Praising thee in hymns, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O most rich mountain of Christ God, wherein He was pleased to dwell, for the salvation of our race, O Bride of God!

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Speaking with exceeding great splendor, thou didst manifestly awe the tyrant with thy discourse of wisdom and grace; and bearing patiently, without pain, the fiery coals of torment, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Looking upon thy youth and the swelling of thy breasts, the evil-hearted one plotted wickedly, held fast by cruel rage; but, rejoicing, O martyr, thou didst cry out, exclaiming to thy Bridegroom: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The disciple of Christ stood forth radiantly when thou wast under guard, healing the grievous wounds which thou hadst endured, O invincible martyr, virgin of Christ, who didst rejoice, saying: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Adam had to die, having violated the commandment of the Almighty; but when thou gavest birth to eternal Life, O most immaculate Virgin, thou didst deliver him from death, and he crieth to thy Son: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Counted worthy to live in gladness and joy everlasting, O Agatha, pray thou to the Lord, that those who honor thee may be illumined with thine ineffable glory and may enjoy life incorruptible.

With mind, heart and soul ineffably loving Christ, Who alone is full of surpassing love, thou didst soar aloft to Him, crying: “I run after Thee and shall dwell with Thee forever!”

Arrayed like the daughter of a king in supernatural garments and comely vesture, thou standest before Christ in honor, O Agatha, crying aloud: “Thee shall I exalt supremely forever, O Lord!”

*Theotokion:* Bearing Christ, the Myrrh poured forth upon us, within thy womb, O Theotokos, thou hast perfumed the world with a fragrance of godly scent. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee, O Virgin: Rejoice, O phial redolent with the scent of myrrh!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Adorned with crowns of victory by the right hand of the Source of life, O divinely wise Agatha, pray thou now, that thy homeland be delivered from tempest, as of old thou didst halt the onslaught of the fire, that we may all magnify thee unceasingly with hymns.

Preserving all things by His divine providence, and rewarding now thy valor, O martyr, Christ causeth thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven, as His own most immaculate bride, and hath vouchsafed thee to rejoice with the angels and martyrs.

By thy supplications, O honored and all-glorious athlete, render Christ, the Judge of all, merciful to me, and cleanse me of the multitude of my transgressions, ever unceasingly entreating the Compassionate One, O thou beauty of the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* The Son Who with the Father is equally without beginning, and Who was ineffably incarnate of thy pure blood hath revealed Himself to us like the sun, O all-pure and unwedded Mother; and, driving the darkness away, He hath illumined all things.

Exapostilarion of the martyr: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

For the sake of Christ thou didst endure the severing of thy breasts and all other torments, O good virgin athlete; wherefore, thy Bridegroom hath caused thee to dwell in a beautiful bridal-chamber, where thou dost dance with the angels, O glorious virgin martyr Agatha.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say; for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!” *Thrice*

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Holding the Master in his arms with fear and joy, Symeon asked to be released from life, hymning the Theotokos.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Symeon cried aloud: “Now let me depart unto true life, O my Savior; for I have seen Thee, O Master, the Light of the world!”

*Stichos:* A Light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

The chaste and venerable Anna, hath now confessed in prophecy Him Who sprang forth from the Virgin for the deliverance of mortals.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone & melody—

Rejoice, O thou who received the Joy of the world, Christ the Bestower of life, causing the grief of our first mother to cease, O Virgin.

