The 7th Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints, Parthenius, Bishop of Lampsacus.

Commemoration of our Venerable Father Luke of Hellas

If this day fall outside the Great Fast, the service for the Afterfeast of the Meeting and of the saints. But if this day fall within the Great Fast, then only those of the saints.

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the holy hierarch, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

The namesake of virginity, the beacon of Lampsacus, the radiant morning-star of miracles, the great Parthenius calleth us all together by his memorial, that we who hymn Christ the Savior may keep spiritual festival.

Bearing God within thyself from childhood, with the fire of thy prayers, O all-blessed and wise one, thou didst burn up legions of the demons and didst guide the flock of Lampsacus; for, casting down the temples of the idols, thou didst renew thyself for God.

The fish which was cast forth, a breathless thing which yet imparted life, proclaimed thy wonder, as did the fruit of the barren field and vineyard and the generous rain promised to those who wept. Wondrous are thy works, O performer of sacred rites! Wherefore, pray thou that we be saved.

And 3 stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Following the Lord wholly from thy youth, thou didst forsake thy parents, passionate attachments and worldly love, O glorious one, and didst live in the wilderness, leading the life of fasters in humility; which thou didst perfect, lamenting in spirit, O venerable one, making thyself a good merchant, distributing thy possessions to the poor and buying Christ, the precious Pearl; and when thou didst obtain Him, thy desire, thou didst rest, O right glorious one.

Beaten, reviled and afflicted by thy parents, O father, for the sake of Christ Whom thou didst desire, O glorious one, wounded with desire for Him thou didst count as nought the beauties of this world and didst love the separation from thy mother and thy wandering; and thou wast invested with the monastic habit, O most sacred one. Yet, at thy mother’s entreaties, O venerable Luke, God revealed thee, who didst not wish to be revealed, for, as He loveth mankind, He showed pity.

Ending thy sacred life, O most sacred one, thou didst perform excellent and all-glorious miracles, O sacred one, when God gave thee beforehand a divine token of the reward of Thy godly labors; and He shall give thee a never-fading wreath and crowning glory when He shall come as Judge. Wherefore, entreat Him, that He deliver from all affliction those who ever hymn thee, O all-wondrous Luke.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Germanus: idiomelon, in the same tone—

O Christ our God, Whose good pleasure it was to sit today in the arms of the elder, as in the chariot of the cherubim: in that Thou lovest mankind, deliver and save us who hymn Thee, calling us forth from the tyranny of the passions.

But if this day fall within the Great Fast: Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most immaculate one, quickly visit me who have been wounded by the robbers’ assaults of the demons and who lie, wholly unable to move, on the ever-shifting path of this life, in need of mercy; and do thou pour wine and oil upon mine incurable wounds, and restore me to health; that I may glorify thee and lovingly hymn thy mighty works, as is meet, O Mother and Virgin, who alone art pure.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

A sword pierced thy heart, O all-pure Mistress, as Symeon said, when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee ineffably, condemned by the iniquitous and lifted up upon the Cross, tasting vinegar and gall, His side pierced, His hands and feet run through with nails; and, lamenting, thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: “What is this new mystery, O my Child most sweet?”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Receive in thine arms, O Symeon, the Creator of all things! O elder, take up Christ, to Whom the Virgin Maiden gave birth without seed, unto the joy of our race.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Assembling, O ye people, let us hymn God, the Creator of the law, before Whom the multitudes of angels tremble, the only Benefactor and Bestower of the law, for the salvation of our souls.

*Stichos:* A light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I have beheld Thee, the preëternal Light of revelation for the nations and Israel, O Christ, and of my bodily union.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone—

Let the gates of heaven be opened today; for the unoriginate Word of the Father, receiving a beginning under time, without abandoning His divinity, is of His own will borne by His Virgin Mother into the temple of the law as a babe forty days old. And Symeon taketh Him in his arms, crying: “Let Thy servant depart, O Master, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the world to save the human race, glory be to Thee!”

Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their entreaties govern our life in peace.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection. *Thrice*

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the saints; Now & ever…: that of the feast, again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Thou didst become a babe for my sake, O Ancient of days, and didst partake of purification, O most pure God, that Thou mightest assure me of the flesh Thou didst receive from the Virgin. And Symeon, taught thereby, recognized Thee as God appearing in the flesh; and the elder kissed Thee, our Life, and, rejoicing, cried out: “Release me, for I have seen Thee, the Life of all!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels…”—

He Who is with the Father on the holy throne, coming to earth was born of the Virgin; He Who is unlimited by time became a babe; and Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, said, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Compassionate One, gladdening me!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

The radiant effulgence of miracles, emitting splendors, illumine us all with the grace of the virtues on the radiant festival of the wise hierarch.

Thou didst lift up thy mind to the mountain of dispassion, O venerable Parthenius, and, entering the darkness of the Scriptures, thou wast shown to be full of immaterial light, O venerable and glorious one.

Truly drawing the word of God as a sword, O holy hierarch Parthenius, thou didst wound the might of the enemy; wherefore, thou hast received trophies of victory over the demons.

*Theotokion:* In paradise, O Virgin, envy begat the death of men; but the Son of God the Father, to Whom thou gavest birth, hath destroyed it with a mighty noise, granting immortality to our race.

Canon of the Venerable One, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Standing before the throne of thy Master, O Luke, beholder of God, grant me the words to hymn thy radiant and splendid life, lifting the darkness from my mind.

The sacred one, loving Thee with all his might, steadfastly applied himself to asceticism, enduring tribulations, labors and pangs, whereby he hath found never-ending sweetness.

Ever making thy body steadfast through abstinence, O wise father Luke, by frequent vigils and all manner of afflictions thou didst stem the assaults of grievous passions.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who gavest birth to the Lord, who bore in the flesh God Who is inseparable from the Father, yet became incarnate in His compassion for mortals: Show me to be above the vengeance of the passions.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Flourishing in the virtues like a palm-tree on earth, O venerable one, thou didst store up the fruits of immortality in the heavens.

The grace abiding within thee, O venerable one, showed thee to be a temple of the God of all; wherefore, thou hast been glorified, O Parthenius.

Invested by God with the all-precious vesture of the hierarchy, O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a performer of sacred acts, worthy of His goodness.

*Theotokion:* In manner past understanding, O pure Mistress, the middle-wall of our condemnation hath been destroyed by thy birthgiving, and we have been united to the divine Essence.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Furnishing thyself with wings through fervent love of the Savior, thou didst reject the love for thy parents; wherefore, O blessed Luke, thou wast a stranger to all the sweet things of this world.

Desiring to make of thyself a temple for the Lord, thou madest thine abode in the wilderness like Elijah of old, contending against the demons. Wherefore, thou didst obtain a blessed end.

Thou didst show thyself to be a servant right obedient to every commandment of God, keeping them well and humbling thyself. Wherefore, thou hast won the heights of heaven.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, earnestly entreat the Word, Who in manner past recounting manifested Himself, that He deliver me from all irrationality.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Thou didst receive the divine grace of miracles, O sacred Parthenius of godly wisdom, God-bearing wonderworker, cleansing the faithful of all the ­passions and dispelling spirits of wickedness, O father. Wherefore, we hymn thee as a great initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.

Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Filled with the divine Spirit, thou didst shine forth in works of piety, O sacred wonderworker Parthenius, and didst turn men away from falsehood, healing the sufferings of the sick. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Loving virtue from childhood, thou didst avoid all pleasures, O wise one, diligently showing forth fasting and abstinence; and considering thy mother’s desire to be of no account, thou didst secretly commit thyself to a life of wandering. But God revealed thee again to thy mother, who justly lamented the loss of thee, O most excellent one. Dwelling now with her, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone…: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ piping…”—

Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who with the Father art equally without beginning, and wast borne into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder received Thee in his arms, crying: “Now lettest Thou depart him whom Thou didst visit, according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the human race.”

But if this day fall within the Great Fast: Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O undefiled, blameless and most immaculate Mistress, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and golden candlestand of the light of God: With the radiance of dispassion illumine my soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with torrents of compunction wash thou my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance cleanse me of the mire of mine evil deeds, that I may cry out with love: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of my transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, the ewe-lamb exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb is in pain, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy: take pity, and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings.”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Delighting in the unspeakable mysteries of God, O thrice-blessed one, in godly manner thou didst learn His hidden things. Wherefore, thou hast poured forth rivers of understanding, O Parthenius.

Wholly caught up in mind to heaven in manner divine, O God-bearer, thou didst noetically behold ineffable glory; wherefore, on earth thou wast shown to be a peer of the angels, O Parthenius.

All creation rejoiceth with the angels, beholding the signs wrought by thee past understanding, O father; wherefore, it hymneth the Cause of them as mighty God.

*Theotokion:* In that the mysteries of thy new birthgiving are all-glorious and ineffable, awesome and fearful, O pure Theotokos, mind and thought are overcome therein, O all-pure one.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Thou wast shown to be innocent, venerable, righteous, meek and chaste, O father Luke; wherefore, thou hast been called blessed by the Creator and Master of all, O most blessed one.

Seeing thee passing through this life in goodly manner, he who hateth thee was inflamed and raised up a multitude of temptations against thee; yet he was rebuked by thy words as an empty wolf, gaping vainly.

With uprightness of mind didst thou guide thy life toward that which is higher, O most blessed father, desiring to behold the Uttermost of all desires, which thou hast right fittingly received.

*Theotokion:* The Pure One found thee to be beautiful in comeliness beyond all others, O pure Virgin, and He made His abode within thy womb, and hath delivered me from the disfigurement of the passions and from darkness.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

O Parthenius, thou wast truly anointed with the oil of the Spirit to serve, as is meet, the Lord Who adorned thee with glory.

Plumbing the depths of the Scriptures, O all-glorious one, and choosing Christ, the Pearl of great price, thou didst present Him to thy flock.

As thou dost possess inexhaustible grace from God, O wise one, thou pourest forth all-glorious miracles upon all, O wonderworker Parthenius.

*Theotokion:* Let heaven drop down gladness and grace upon the earth; for now God hath given it gladness in the highest—the only Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Receiving the reward of thy labors from Him Who giveth riches, O venerable father, thou wast shown to all to be an abyss of miracles, dispelling the infirmities of those who have recourse to thee.

Thou wast not shaken by the manifold assaults of the enemy, O father, neither wast thou frightened by his attacks, but thou didst stand unshaken, like a firm pillar, arrayed in humility as in a breast-plate.

Having completed well thy sacred life, O most blessed one, and received the grace of healings from Almighty God, thou hast enlightened the blind and made the lame and paralyzed whole.

*Theotokion:* O ye people, hymn her who ineffably gave birth to the Word of God yet remained an incorrupt Virgin even after giving birth, for she is the intercession of all and our salvation.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

With the sound of the Spirit, O all-glorious one, thy God-bearing life doth trumpet forth to all the world thy gifts of beauteous miracles.

Thou didst sprinkle the water of adoption upon thy flock, washing away with thy teachings the stain of impiety and illumining them with the light of grace, O Parthenius.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, for the world thou didst put forth the Fruit of the incorrupt Mind, Him Who is shown to be the ever-living Mediator of incorruption for those who honor thee with faith and love.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thine ancient power over us hath been destroyed, O false-minded one, and thy many wiles have disappeared, O wicked one; for, lo! a simple and innocent youth cast thee down.

Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyes, nor rest to thine eye-lids, O venerable one, until thou didst lay low all the craft of the deceiver, who all the day long raised up divers temptations against thee.

Thou didst reach the end of thy chaste life, ever offering hospitality to strangers and giving rich and abundant alms; wherefore, thou hast received incorruptible glory and delight.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth in the flesh to One of the Trinity, O all-pure Theotokos, in manner past understanding and recounting; wherefore, I cry out: By thy supplications show me to be a dwelling-place of the divine Trinity.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

The divine grace of the Spirit which dwelt within thee, O wise Parthenius, truly made thee a temple and church of glory, wherein the Father, the Son and the Comforter Himself abode.

With divine grace thou didst burn up all the thorny falsehood of ungodliness on earth, O venerable one, and didst sow in thy flock divine teachings which produce the fruits of eternal life.

Of old, with the lure of thy tongue, O Parthenius, thou didst draw thy flock forth unto life out of the abyss of deception; and now, by thy supplications, O father, thou dost pursue all manner of fish by grace.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, the angels beheld the corrupted nature of a race of dust strangely turned again to life and heavenly glory by thy birthgiving.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon did not fear the flame of the furnace, but, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

The shrine of thy relics hath been shown to be a wellspring of healings, O Luke, wherein everyone who hath recourse thereto is delivered from all manner of passions, blessing thee, O venerable one, and hymning thy Master.

With most magnificent signs, O father, wast thou glorified by the Lord, Whom thou didst glorify first with the pangs of abstinence; for thou didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

O venerable one, thou wast shown to be all-radiant in thy life, most magnificent in miracles and steadfast in all good works; wherefore, thou hast received the reward of thy labors, the kingdom of God.

*Theotokion:* Save thy people and city, O most immaculate Theotokos, thou intercession for us who cry out to thee with unwavering faith: Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With the staff of faith thou didst demolish the temples of the pagans, O wise and venerable one, and thou didst raise up temples to God our Savior, wherein thou didst offer up pure sacrifices, chanting to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice of sweet savor, O wise Parthenius, and by the fire of abstinence didst send up a pure fragrance to the divine and unapproachable altar of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Possessed of divine grace from God, O venerable father Parthenius, thou pourest forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee, cleansing their infirmities and driving off hordes of the demons with might, teaching them ever to hymn their Creator as God.

*Theotokion:* The Son and Word of God, Who is utterly unapproachable in His essence, made His abode within thee, O pure and all-pure one, and having clothed Himself in our image, in that He is compassionate, He showed Himself to be right tangible in the flesh and dwelt with us. Wherefore, with great love we honor, hymn and praise thee.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The blessed youths in Babylon, braving danger for the laws of their fathers, reviled the mindless command of the ruler, and, united by the fire which burned them not, they chanted a fitting hymn unto the Almighty: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst dispel all the detriment of the passions, O blessed father Luke, cleansing lepers, strengthening the infirm, straightening bent limbs, healing the halt and the blind, and crying out: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Taking upon thyself many pangs and struggles, vigils and the exhaustion of the flesh, fasting, affliction and prostrations, and every other vexation of the flesh, for the love of thy Creator, O venerable one, thou didst find the glory which is without pain, and, living with Him now, thou dost rejoice. Him do thou therefore entreat, that all of us who magnify thee with faith and love may be saved.

Because of thy divers pangs and virtues, O venerable one, thou didst enter the kingdom of heaven, where thou dost now rejoice eternally, delighting ever in the beauty of thy Master; and with the angels thou dost chant the thrice-holy hymn: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Without knowing man, O pure one, thou gavest birth to Him Who was not separated from the bosom of the Father, yet ineffably became man. Him do thou entreat, that He give me the strength utterly to repel every attack of evil thoughts, and ever to do His divine will, that I may magnify thee.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Having truly shaken off the mire of the passions of the flesh, O thrice-blessed one, thou didst move thyself wholly into divine life, immaterial delight, where, joining chorus, thou dost oversee us.

Reaping in delight the beauty of miracles like noetic flowers during thy holy commemoration, O incorrupt God-bearer, we wear thy deeds like a variously woven wreath.

Thou didst transcend all things in this world, O God-bearing father Parthenius, and dost join chorus with the incorporeal choirs of heaven. Pray for us who faithfully keep thy memory.

*Theotokion:* I hymn thy grace, O Virgin, and magnify thy glory; for thou art truly the enlightenment and consolation of my soul, my ready help, salvation and aid.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Who among mortals is able to recount thy pangs and struggles, O father, for which thou hast received fitting reward from God? For thou, O venerable one, wast the receptacle of the divine Spirit, and wast venerable, upright, true, righteous and without guile.

As thou dwellest in the desired mansions and dost enjoy divine beauty, delighting now to satiety in the flowers of God’s paradise, O most blessed one, rejoicing, remember us to God.

*Triadicon:* O only Essence in three Hypostases, thrice-radiant Being, indivisible Power — Father, Son and Holy Spirit, one Godhead: save those who magnify Thee as God in three Persons.

*Theotokion:* O most lauded Virgin Theotokos, mortal mind is unable to comprehend thy mystery; for without knowing man before giving birth thou didst conceive, yet remained Virgin even after giving birth, and bore the Word Who is equally eternal with the Father.

Exapostilarion of the feast—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say, for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Bearing the Creator and Master as a Babe in her arms, the pure and all-pure Virgin entereth the temple.

*Stichos:* Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, according to Thy word.

Receive, O Symeon, the Lord of glory, as thou wast told by the Holy Spirit. For, lo! He is come!

*Stichos:* A Light of revelation to the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

O good God, now have mine eyes beheld Thy promise! O Thou Who lovest mankind, make speed to release me, Thy servant!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O thou who received the Joy of the world, Christ the Bestower of life, causing the grief of our first mother to cease, O Virgin.

