The 8th Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of the Holy Great Martyr

Theodore the General

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Zechariah,

Who Beheld the Sickle

Afterfeast of the Meeting of Our Lord

At Vespers

At “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera: 3 of the great martyr, in Tone IV, Spec. Mel: “As valiant among the martyrs...”—

A courageous athlete, an invincible warrior, wast thou shown to be by the Holy Spirit, having cast down the adversary with the wisdom of thy words, and the enduring testimony of thy deeds, O wise one. Wherefore, thou hast received crowns of victory and hast been joined to the choirs on high, O great martyr Theodore.

A pillar of godly piety wast thou shown to be, O thou who art most rich; for, detesting the temples of the impious, thou wast brought as a most perfect lamb and a right acceptable sacrifice, unto Him Who was sacrificed in innocence for thy sake, Who hath glorified thy holy memory, and hath given thee to those who are in the world as a treasury of miracles, O Theodore.

Lifted up upon a cross, thy flesh lacerated, wounded with sharp arrows, tormented by all the crafty art of torture, and beheaded by the sword, thou wast shown to be steadfast and invincible through the power of Him Who was nailed to the Cross, O Theodore, thou glory of the martyrs.

And 3 stichera of the prophet, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “What shall we call you...”—

Possessed of a life equal to that of the angels, thou dost manifestly converse with angels, O divinely revealed one, illumining thy mind with things that pass understanding: the purity of wondrous images, the revelation of great mysteries, prophetic proclamation, and spiritual renewal. Pray thou that our souls may be saved.

Thou wast shown to be an earthly angel, having, while on earth, heavenly companions, for thou wast a beholder of heavenly visions, a noetic beacon, and a radiant light, a fruitful olive-tree, as the Psalm doth say, which in godly fashion poureth forth oil upon the pious. Pray thou that our souls may be saved.

Enjoying the longed-for deification, manifestly partaking of everlasting delight, and beholding ineffable glory, adorned with crowns of comeliness, as a most true prophet of God pray thou in behalf of those who earnestly hymn thee, O thou who art pleasing unto God, that our souls may be saved.

But if it be the Fast: Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

To whom hast thou likened thyself, O wretched soul, in no wise rousing thyself to repentance, nor fearing the fire which awaiteth evil? Arise, and cry and call out unto our only assistance: O Virgin Mother, entreat thy Son and our God, that He deliver me from the snare of the deceiver!

Or this Stavrotheotokion, in the same tone and melody—

The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb stretched out of His own will upon the Tree of the Cross, cried out maternally, in pain with her weeping: O my Son, what is this strange sight? O Long-suffering One, how is it that Thou art slain, Who, as Lord, dost bestow life upon all, granting resurrection to mortals? I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!

But if it be not the Fast: Glory..., in Tone VIII—

O all ye faithful, let us bless the great and noble martyr Theodore as is meet; for he is the namesake of God’s gifts and the heir of His blessedness, and the champion of the world, and he prayeth to Christ God in behalf of our souls.

Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in the same tone—

He Who is borne upon the cherubim and is hymned by the seraphim, borne into the temple of God today in accordance with the law, sitteth in the arms of the elder as on a throne, and as God receiveth gifts from Joseph: a pair of turtle-doves—the undefiled Church and the people newly-chosen from among the gentiles; and two young pigeons—the Ruler of the Old and the New. And Symeon, finally receiving the fulfillment of the promise made to him and blessing the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, foretold in imagery the sufferings she would endure and asked from God deliverance, crying out: “Now let me depart, O Master, as Thou didst tell me before; for I have seen Thee, the preëternal Light, the Savior and Lord of the Christian people!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II, Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephrata...”—

Open wide, ye gates of heaven, for Christ is borne into the temple as a babe by the Virgin Mother unto God His Father.

*Stichos:* Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word.

Christ, the burning coal which appeared unto the holy Isaiah, now resteth in the arms of the Theotokos as in a pair of tongs, and He is given to the elder.

*Stichos:* A light to lighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

In fear and joy Symeon held the Master in his arms, and asked for his release from life, singing the praises of the Mother of God.

Glory..., in Tone V—

Today hath the honored memory of Christ’s athlete shone forth more brightly than the morning star, invisibly illumining the hearts of the faithful and dispelling gloom from their souls by the activity of the grace of the Holy Spirit. O ye who love the martyrs, to him let us cry out: Rejoice, O blessed Theodore, for thou hast been revealed to the faithful as a God-given grace, showering a multitude of miracles upon those who have recourse unto thee. And unceasingly entreating Christ, fail not to obtain eternal blessings for those who celebrate thy holy memory with faith.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone—

The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin Mother, fulfilling the prescription of His own law; and, receiving Him, Symeon said: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”

Troparion of the great martyr, in Tone IV—

Through true recruitment didst thou become a most worthy general of the heavenly King, O passion-bearer Theodore; for thou didst wisely put on the whole armor of God and, vanquishing legions of demons, thou didst show thyself to be a victorious athlete. Wherefore, with faith do we ever bless thee.

Glory..., Now and ever..., troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, for from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, Who doth illumine those in darkness. Be glad, thou also, O righteous elder who receivest in thine arms the Deliverer of our souls, Who granteth us resurrection. *Thrice*

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory..., the troparion of the great martyr; Now and ever..., that of the feast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone III, Spec. Mel: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity...”—

Rejoicing, the holy Simeon receiveth Thee incarnate of the Virgin, O Christ, crying out: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master!” And Anna, the glorious prophetess unblamable in holiness, now offereth confession and thanks unto Thee; while we, O Bestower of life, do cry: Glory to Thee Who hath been thus well pleased!

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “Of the shepherds’ pipes...”—

Thou Who with the Father art equally without beginning wast born on earth; and, though unapproachable, Thou wast borne to the temple, where the elder, rejoicing, took Thee in his arms and cried: “Now do Thou dismiss me whom Thou hast visited according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to save the human race.”

Glory..., Now and ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; two canons for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Joyously the elder embraceth Christ,” the composition of Cosmas, in Tone III—

*Irmos:* The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun, Who is borne aloft upon a light cloud, is brought to the temple as a babe on the arm of the unblemished one. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, move quickly and straight to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For Christ the Artificer, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, is borne by the Virgin Mother to God the Father as a babe, He Who was before all the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the Great Martyr, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

O Theodore, great among the martyrs, manifestly endued with divine splendor, sacredly adorned with the crown of martyrdom and radiant with the glory of the Holy Trinity: be thou mindful of us who praise thee.

Full of light, full of grace divine, the sacred memory of thine honored struggles hath shone forth upon us, illumining with most radiant splendor all who piously honor thee, O Theodore, martyr and athlete.

When the tempest of idolatry beset humanity, the sacred martyr, guided by the divine grace of the Cross, reached the haven of heaven rejoicing, having ended his voyage untouched by the storm.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, portal of God, open unto me the doors of repentance, enlighten my soul with holy thoughts, and drive away the heavy clouds of the passions; that, rejoicing, I may honor and bless thee as is meet.

Canon of the Prophet, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

In that the Bestower of life doth hearken to thine entreaties, grant me enlightenment, O most wondrous prophet Zechariah.

Adorned with the beauties of divine comeliness, in purity of soul thou dost behold the beauties of the angels.

As one full of the sanctity of angelic splendor, O divinely wise one, thou didst have angels enlightening and conversing with thee, O thou who art possessed of God.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast loosed the curse of Eve, our first mother, O all-immaculate one; for, having given birth unto Christ, thou didst enrich the world with blessings.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.

God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-created man, who through deception had become childish of mind.

The Creator, having become a Babe without undergoing change, hath shown forth our nature, the product of the earth to which it doth return again, to be like unto divinity.

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Like a mighty lion didst thou stand in the midst of the tribunal, announcing the word of salvation, reproaching the ungodly, proclaiming the truth and denouncing the falsehood of godlessness, O Theodore.

The tyrant was amazed at thy valor, O wise one; and, moved to bestial wrath, he flogged thee without mercy with a knout of hide, O Theodore, who had wrought destruction upon the abominable graven images.

Shown forth as crowned by the power of the divine Spirit and strengthened by the grace of the Cross, O divinely wise one, with brave determination thou didst wipe away the bloody drops of thy wounds as though they were drops of water.

*Theotokion:* The Lord Who was born of thee hath truly done great things to thee, and all ­generations bless thee, the Mother of God.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* None is as holy as the Lord, and none is as righteous as our God, Whom all creation doth hymn, singing: None is righteous save Thee, O Lord!

The grace of the Most High overshadowed thee, enlightening and teaching thee by the holy angels the divine guidance of ineffable knowledge, O most wise and blessed one.

Instructed in divine goodness as one most pure, O thou who art most rich, thou didst learn to live fruitfully, with divine sanctification, in the most sacred city.

An immovable rampart, the confirmation of divinely wise people and the salvation of souls hast Thou been, O Lord, as the wondrous prophet foretold of old.

*Theotokion:* The incorrupt and most pure Offspring of thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, hath delivered the world from corruption and death, for thou gavest birth unto the Savior, the eternal Word.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I, the composition of Romanus the Melodist—

O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth and didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O Christ God. But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

*Ikos:* Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne to Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts are amazed, saying: “Things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable do we behold: for He Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom nought can contain is held in the elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is of His own will limited by the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone loveth mankind.”

Sessional hymn of the Great Martyr, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Having put on the whole armor of God and cast down the falsehood of idolatry, thou didst move the angels to praise thy struggles; for, inflaming thy mind with divine love, thou didst bravely endure a fiery death. Wherefore, true to thy name, thou givest gifts divine unto those who ask, O passion-bearer Theodore. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Beseech Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy memory.

Glory..., Sessional hymn of the Prophet, in Tone III, Spec. Mel: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity...”—

O wondrous Zechariah, thou didst behold the steeds of the chariot, the incorporeal servants, who are guided by the hand of the God of all. Rejoicing with them, as an ever-memorable prophet pray thou that those who keep thy most sacred memory with unwavering faith be guided to the path of knowledge divine.

Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I, Spec. Mel: “The choir of angels...”—

He Who is with the Father on the holy throne, coming to earth was born of the Virgin; He Who is unlimited by time became a babe. And Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, said, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Compassionate One, gladdening me.”

But if it be the Fast: Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Inconceivable and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God which was wrought in thee, O joyous Lady; for, having conceived, thou gavest birth unto the Unapproachable One, Who was wrapped in the flesh by thy most pure blood. Him do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

Thy pure Mother who knew not wedlock, O Christ, seeing Thee hanging dead upon the Cross, said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous and ungrateful synagogue of the Jews repaid Thee, which hath enjoyed Thy many and great wonders, O my Son?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried out: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, take in thine arms Christ, the Word become a babe, of Whom thou wast informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

O Symeon, rejoicing, take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who fulfilleth the order of the law; and cry aloud unto Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Beholding the Word Who is without beginning, the Author of all, borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on the throne of the cherubim, Symeon marvelled and cried out to Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having Christ speaking forth within thee, O blessed one, with wise words thou didst set at naught the pride of Licinius; for, lo! truly didst thou denounce his great impiety, O martyr, and with most glorious deeds didst amaze those who looked on, O Theodore, thou athlete noble of mind.

Suspended aloft by the iniquity of the tyrant, torn with iron claws, stained with the drops of thine own blood unjustly shed, thou didst put off the coarse garments of the corruption of mortality.

*Theotokion:* Scratch away the wicked handwriting of my sins with the spear which pierced the sacred side of Him Whose desire it was to become incarnate of thee, O all-holy Virgin, and pray thou that I, who have thoughtlessly separated myself from God, may be written in the book of the saved.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* O Word, with divine vision the prophet perceived Thee Who wast to become incarnate of the Theotokos alone, the mountain overshadowed; and with fear he glorified Thy power.

O most blessed one, clearly thou dost instruct all to honor the illumining Essence which, though One, is yet distinguished in three Suns and doth ever increase in His bringing all creatures into being.

Being thyself a chariot of God and beholding divers angelic chariots moving in good order, O prophet, thou wast vouchsafed to surpass them.

O most blessed one, in sacred manner thou didst behold a lamp of great splendor, an image of the effulgence of God, and thou hast seen Him Who seeth all things, by Whom all are saved.

*Theotokion:* The God-seeing and divinely wise prophets foresee the image of thy pure birthgiving, prefiguring it in many and divers images.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was manifested of old to the prophet, beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried out: “Rejoice, O pure one, for as a throne dost thou hold God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who knew not wedlock, said: “O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant God, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace!”

“Isaiah was purified by the burning ember brought by the seraph,” the elder cried to the Mother of God, “and thou dost illumine me, giving me Him Whom thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.”

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Illumined with the radiance of the divine Spirit, consumed with love for Christ, and nurtured with the hope of heaven, thou didst ardently despise the flesh and didst neither know pain nor pay heed to torment.

Bearing the easy yoke of the Master upon thy neck, O most blessed passion-bearer, and weighted down with a weight of lead, thou didst not yield in any way, nor wast thou shaken or vanquished, O valiant warrior Theodore.

Having called thee from heaven, the all-good Word made thee valorous, and by His power thou didst endure the bitter pain, torment, want and death inflicted upon thee by the iniquitous, O glorious martyr of Christ.

*Theotokion:* That I remain whole, my good estate never changing, walking according to that which is right and doing those good deeds which are pleasing unto God, pray thou, O good one who gavest birth unto the good Word Who hath delivered us from irrationality.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Foreseeing the suffering of the Savior with a pure heart and keenness of mind, the prophet Zechariah is rightly blessed.

Supernaturally the holy prophet commanded us of old, saying: “Rejoice, O Sion, for thy righteous King doth come, saving all by His meekness!”

The glory of the prophets and adornment of divinely eloquent men doth illumine the world with the radiance of prophecy.

*Theotokion:* Having restored us by the Virgin’s birthgiving, He Who became man for our sake hath freed us of the ancient transgression.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.

Manifestly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of mortals in Thy loving-kindness.

Now Thou lettest depart in peace him who worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of the Virgin, God become a Child.

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

In imitation of the Passion of the Dispassionate One wast thou crucified, O glorious martyr, nailed to a tree; and thou didst emulate the Master Who of His own will freed man of the passions by the Cross, O most blessed one.

Suspended upon a tree like the Lamb, shot full of arrows, thine eyes put out, wounded throughout thy body, O blessed one, thou didst wound the hearts of thine enemies with the spear of thy suffering.

Though torrents of boundless torments imperiled the house of thy soul, yet was it not shaken, for it was founded upon the immovable rock of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin and enlightened the human race.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, sovereign Lady of all the world, as thou gavest birth unto the Lord of all, deliver me from bondage to the enemy, rescue me from his torment, and save me who place unwavering hope on thee.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* *Same as that of the preceding canon.*

Filled with prophetic inspiration and having learned knowledge of things to come in manner surpassing nature, thou wast sent to preach the grace which was to come, knowing the day of the Cross of the Lord, O thou who art pleasing unto God.

Adorned with spiritual understanding, thou wast vouchsafed gifts which are beyond comprehension, O thou who art most rich, beholding angelic manifestations and ranks, and proclamations and glories which teach wondrous and divine mysteries.

Having acquired the lamp of the virtues, thou dost shine with the radiance of divine knowledge, foretelling the mystic lamp whereby, in manner past recounting, the incarnation of the Word would appear as God out of Sion, O Zechariah, thou God-pleasing prophet.

*Theotokion:* Loving the beauty of Jacob, the Sun of the Godhead Who established heaven showed thee to be a noetic heaven, O Theotokos, and shone forth in the flesh from thy womb, and illumined the world with grace.

Kontakion of the Great Martyr, in Tone II, Spec. Mel: “Seeking the Highest...”—

Having put on the whole armor of faith with valor of soul, and taking in hand the word of God as a spear, thou didst conquer the enemy, O Theodore, great among the martyrs. With them cease thou never to entreat Christ God in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Come, all ye faithful and with wreaths of hymnody let us crown Theodore, the most radiant adornment of the martyrs; for in the splendor of his miracles he is shown to be God’s great gift to the world. Having vanquished Belial the enemy by his honorable struggle, he raineth down a deluge of healing with the drops of his blood. In all these things doth Christ rejoice, and He granteth everlasting peace. Wherefore, we cry out to the martyr: Pray thou unceasingly for us all!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

“I go to announce the glad tidings unto Adam who dwelleth in hades and unto Eve,” cried Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

God Who doth deliver the mortal race shall go even unto hades; He shall grant remission to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: “A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Rejoicing, thou didst speak of the mighty works of the Ruler of all; wherefore, those who looked on, amazed, forsook the tyranny of deception and cried out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Rejoicing, with the nets of thy words most wise thou didst draw forth from the deep of ignorance those who drew nigh, O most blessed Theodore, and thou didst make divine martyrs of those who chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Entering the prison where thou wast bound to a column, O Theodore, a holy angel loosed thee, granting thee boldness and strengthening thee to cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Christ, for the sake of her who gave Thee birth, take pity and save me who have lived in sloth and have disdained Thy holy laws and Thy sacred commandments, for Thou art our God and most merciful Benefactor.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thy divinely inspired proclamation hath gone forth throughout all the earth, as hath the power of thy words, which cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, for ever!

Wholly illumined with radiance from on high, thou didst behold things which are to come as though they were happening in the present. Wherefore, O thou who art most rich, thou didst cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, and to be praised and exalted above all forever!

*Theotokion:* With hymns do I honor thee, O Virgin, who hast honored the human race which of old was condemned through grievous dishonor; and I chant: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, join ye chorus now in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Splendidly struggling, thou didst vanquish the enemy, having destroyed his armies with the weapons of faith. Wherefore, thou hast been crowned with a wreath of victory, chanting unto thy Master: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

After thy glorious crucifixion, thy blessed suffering and thy boundless torments, thou didst bow thy neck before God, O blessed one, and thy precious head was cut off with a sword while crying out to the Master: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

Thy sacred and much-suffering body hath been a wellspring of healing for the faithful, whence those who piously have recourse thereto draw forth deliverance from passions and salvation for their souls, crying out to the Master: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, enliven my soul which hath been slain; raise it, for it hath fallen; heal it, for it hath been wounded; grant peace to my mind, calm thou the waves of temptations, and save me who cry out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The divine Zechariah, converser with angels, doth command: Rejoice exceedingly, O Mount Sion, holy city; and thou, O Jerusalem, be glad for ever!

Adorn thyself, O prophet Zechariah, beholding the words fulfilled which thou didst utter in prophecy, enlightened by the Spirit, unto those who praise the Lord and exalt Him above all forever!

Among the myrtle trees didst thou behold angels standing, who instructed thee in knowledge of all things, praising Christ forever, O glorious prophet.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, portal of the immaterial Radiance! Rejoice, swift cloud which revealed the Sun of righteousness to the world, O pure Theotokos!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into the temple.

Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!

The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to all present.

Canon of the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou didst consecrate thyself to our God, the Lamb Who was slain, O martyr that wast raised up as a sweet-smelling holocaust unto Him, a sacred offering, a sacrifice perfect and most pure. Wherefore, we praise and bless thee as is meet.

As the dawn, as a radiant day, as the sun, didst thou appear, O Theodore, piously illumining the earth with thy wonders and the splendid rays of thy suffering, and driving away the darkness of our deception and passions, O most blessed Theodore.

Having conquered the incorporeal foe, thou wast united with the angels while yet in the flesh, and with the choirs of the martyrs thou art ever glad. With them dost thou give utterance to a divine hymn unto the Trinity, O thrice-blessed Theodore, thou beacon of the Church and adornment of passion-bearers.

The earth is gladdened by the deposition of thy precious body, O Theodore, and heaven rejoiceth, having acquired thy sacred soul. And men, ever celebrating thine honorable memory, entreat thee in their prayers as our intercessor, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin beloved of God, having bathed the wounds of my heart in pure repentance and tearful weeping, entreat thou the Good One, that He save me from all defilement, that I may bless and magnify thee, O all-immaculate one.

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* With unceasing glorification we magnify thee, the Mother of the Most High, who knewest not wedlock, who didst truly give birth unto God the Word in manner past understanding, and art more highly exalted than the all-pure hosts.

Having forsaken every earthly sense, O most wise one, thou standest radiantly before the divine and most pure Mind, offering up prayers in behalf of the world. Wherefore, we all bless thee, O Zechariah.

Following the utterances of thy lips, O thou who art divinely revealed, we call upon the Lord; and, saved by Him, O Zechariah, we piously bless thee as a prophet and preacher of the Truth.

By thy prayers, O divinely inspired one, do thou render the Master merciful unto those who with faith celebrate thy sacred and renowned feast and lovingly honor thee as a prophet and divine preacher of the Truth.

*Theotokion:* Clearly knowing thee to be an abyss and depth of spiritual gifts, O pure Theotokos, and trusting in thine intercession, we make haste and speedily have recourse to thy protection.

Exapostilarion of the Great Martyr, Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

Thou didst utterly quench all the fiery darts of the wicked and the raging of the demons and didst die for thy faith in the Creator, O blessed Theodore; and as a witness to the Truth thou dost save all from every tribulation and from the malice of the evil one.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Exapostilarion of the feast, Automelon—

Set by the Spirit in the sanctuary, the elder doth take the Master of the law in his arms, crying out: “Now loose Thou the bonds of my flesh in peace, as Thou didst say; for with mine eyes have I beheld the revelation of the gentiles and the salvation of Israel!”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I, Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...”—

The pure one, as the truly most splendid Ark of God which beareth our cleansing, bringeth Christ into the temple, and placeth Him with honor in the hands of the godly Simeon. Wherefore, the Holy of Holies is now hallowed and rejoiceth in Him Who alone is holy.

*Stichos:* Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word.

Today hath Simeon been glorified, receiving Christ as a live coal in godly manner and, cleansed, he kisseth Him with his lips. He confesseth and rejoiceth, and doth ask leave of Him to depart. And now, piously blessing Him, we all honor Him with unceasing praise.

*Stichos:* A light to lighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.

The pure Virgin, the living portal, bore within herself the King and Lord; and to the temple she beareth Him Who entered through the doors which were of old mystically shut on earth. Wherefore, forming a choir in her presence, we all praise her with holy hymns.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Having appointed for thyself a feat of martyrdom, thou didst bravely oppose deception, O Theodore, and with thy tongue of fiery eloquence didst put the inhumanity of Licinius to shame. Wherefore, rejoicing with the angels, O blessed one, entreat Christ God, that He be merciful unto us on the day of judgment.

Now and ever..., in Tone V—

Examine ye the Scriptures, as Christ our God said in the Gospels, for therein do we find Him born, wrapped in swaddling bands, laid in a manger, fed with milk, undergoing circumcision, and carried by Symeon, not in a semblance or guise, but appearing in truth to the world. To Him do we cry out: O preëternal God, glory be to Thee!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode VIII of the canon of the Feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Great Martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \(II Tim. 2: 1-10\)

Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man who warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The ­husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore, I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God shall they blossom forth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §36 \(10: 16-22\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

