The 11th Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Blaise

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. George of Sofia\)

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

The summit of the virtues and foundation of the faithful, the glory of hierarchs and the boast of the martyrs with splendor doth summon all the faithful to his holy memorial, to chant unto him as a victor who glorified God on earth.

Moved by a vision of Christ, the Angel of Great Counsel, when thou didst behold the council of the iniquitous, O wise martyr, thou didst proceed straightway to the tribunal, taking the trophies of victory in thy hand; and thou dwellest now in the heavens, O all-sanctified one.

With the drops of thy blood, O martyr Blaise, thou didst weave a beautiful robe for the Church, embroidered by thy well anointed fingers and dyed with thy manifold pangs; and she is arrayed therein like a comely bride, hymning Christ the Bridegroom.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

As a good tutor of children and a teacher of piety, by the divine power of thy godly words thou didst lead the God-loving women to the struggle of martyrdom, thereby strengthening for Christ the weakness of their nature; and with them having finished well the course of sufferings, thou dost rejoice with splendor in the bridal chamber of heaven, adorned with a twofold crown of divine glory, and making entreaty with them, that peace and great mercy be imparted to us.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

The all-pure one, beholding Christ, Who loveth mankind, crucified, His side pierced by a spear, cried out, lamenting: “What is this, O my Son? How have these thankless people rewarded Thee for the good things Thou hast done for them? Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”

At the Aposticha: Glory…, in Tone VI—

Blossoming forth in the exercise of the divine virtues in accordance with thy name, O Blaise, thou didst flourish like a palm-tree in the courts of the Lord, as David said, and like a cedar didst thou increase through chastisements. Like a fruitful vine in the house of God, pruned during torment by the application of tortures, thou hast exuded for us a noetic wine from the fruit of thy struggles. Drinking thereof, we fill our hearts with divine gladness; and assembling together for the honored memorial of thy repose, we praise thee, calling thee blessed, and asking that, through thee, we may receive peace and great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Thy pure Virgin Mother, beholding the most iniquitous ones who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, was wounded within, as Symeon foretold.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a way to the vision of God, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Blaise. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

AT MATINS

Canon, in Tone IV

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Together let us offer harmonious praise unto Christ, celebrating the glorious memory of the wise Blaise, and chanting a hymn unto our God, in that He hath been glorified.

Blaise, the seer of things afar off, the lover of Christ, as hierarch, martyr and shepherd, which he hath shown by his activity, doth summon us to share in the divine banquet he layeth before us.

Thou didst purify thy life with the virtues and wast shown to be a vessel fit to receive the divine myrrh of an honorable ministry, O wise one; and thou didst embroider thy vesture with the blood of martyrdom.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O pure and all-holy Theotokos, the whole human race hath risen from our first father’s fall and hath manifestly been delivered from the curse of our first mother.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

With the knowledge of God thou wast anointed to serve Christ as priest, and wast taught by the Spirit; and thou didst sanctify thyself with blood.

Truly, in fulfillment of thine own works, thou becamest a martyr and teacher, O Blaise, through thy doctrine.

A model of piety wast thou for the Church of Christ, and thou didst brighten thy sacred vesture with the blood of thy sufferings.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth on earth to God all-rich, O pure one, from the fall thou hast led humanity up to heaven.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

O God-bearing Blaise, godly scion, unfading blossom, much-suffering branch of the vine of Christ: with thy gladness fill those who honor thy memory, praying unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

As a precious scion of piety, by the power of the Spirit thou wast shown to be an uprooter of ungodliness; for thou didst denounce the falseness of idolatry before the tribunal, and right boldly preached the worship of the Trinity. Wherefore, when thou gavest thyself over to the iniquitous, O athlete, thou didst slay the creature of the serpent who is the author of evil. For this cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O undefiled, blameless and most immaculate Mistress, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and golden candlestand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with torrents of compunction wash thou my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance cleanse me of the mire of mine evil deeds, that I may cry out with love: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of my transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, the ewe-lamb exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb is pained, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy: take pity, and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings.”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Made steadfast with the staff of truth, like Moses thou didst cast down the deceits of the serpent, O Blaise, favored one of Christ, denouncing the tyrant and instructing a new people.

The affinity of thy corrections with God showed thee to be a benefactor of both reason-endowed and dumb creatures, O blessed one; wherefore, thou hast received gifts of healing.

In the vale wherein sickness was rife, O father, thou didst rightly choke the thorns of iniquity for thy flock in Christ.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the Tree of life, O all-hymned one, thou wast shown to be like a garden of paradise planted within the Church; and eating thereof, we have come to know Christ our God.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Extending the bounds of thy flock on the pasture of God, O holy hierarch, in divinely wise manner thou didst drive falsehood out of all the earth.

With thy teachings thou didst confirm thy flock in the Faith, O wise hierarch; for, lo! thou hast trampled down the deception of the woman.

Made steadfast by the love of Christ, the women came to emulate thy struggles, O father, and were slaughtered in their zeal for Christ.

*Theotokion:* The visitation of death is truly slain by thy birthgiving, O Mistress; for darkness is seen to be destroyed by the Light.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

With the beauty of the divers wounds of thy body thou didst adorn the comeliness of thy mystical vesture, O hierarch; and thou wast crowned with twofold grace.

In that the women who suffered with thee hastened with faith in Christ, they died with zeal, O father Blaise. Preserve thou those who keep thy memory with love.

Aflame with zeal for Christ, and having cast off all flattering deception, with their blood the martyrs burned up the infliction of torments.

*Theotokion:* Thou art my strength and my song, O Theotokos; for on thee have I set my hope, and through thee have I exalted my horn against mine enemies.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As firstfruits…”—

With the anointing of the priesthood and the blood of martyrdom wast thou adorned, O glorious Blaise; and, joining chorus, thou shinest in the highest, watching over those who come to thy temple and therein unceasingly cry out to thee: Preserve us all!

*Ikos:* O brethren, assemble with haste and come ye to the temple of the martyr, that we may raise a song unto him today and delight in grace; for he saveth souls and bodies from manifold sufferings, as a martyr, as a venerable saint, as a faithful hierarch and a champion for those who cry out to him with a pure soul: Preserve us all!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Like David we cry out to thee with love, O father Blaise: thou art an emulator of the Lord, and thy footsteps are not known; for like the Lord’s thy paths were shown to be in the waters.

Delighting in the grace of the Savior, the martyrs truly replaced torment with joy; and their blood, in manner transcending man, was awesomely transformed into milk.

Beholding their mothers’ boldness for martyrdom, the children, delighting in the grace of Christ and His majesty, hastened, rejoicing, to the Master.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O sanctified and divine habitation of the Most High; for through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having stretched forth thy hands before the face of the Lord in the ministry of thy priesthood, O father, thou didst offer Christ thy blood and prayers. Wherefore, having drained the cup of salvation, O wise one, thou didst cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Piously emulating the widow, with faith and divine joy we keep thy memory, O Blaise; and as thou didst keep the promise which thou gavest her, be thou also, in thy good gifts, a help unto us as thou wast to her.

*Theotokion:* Human nature, which before was condemned by the fall into transgression, hath through thy birthgiving truly found blessing, and singeth joyfully: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Preparing an inheritance in the sweetness of paradise and the kingdom therein, O wise and holy hierarch Blaise, thou didst hasten to the slaughter, rejoicing in the Lord.

With the sword of the Spirit, O blessed one, thou didst cut down the pride of the ungodly who rose up in vain against thy flock; but thou didst adorn thy sheep with thy blood.

O wise and holy hierarch Blaise, with the women who suffered with thee, and their godly children, pray that those who praise thee may receive a crown; for we have chanted unto thee from the beginning.

*Theotokion:* In giving birth, as before and after birthgiving, thou wast shown to be a Virgin, transcending the established laws of nature, O Mistress. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—

Thou wast a holy hierarch and martyr, a man bereft of guile, O Blaise, and thou didst bear the wounds of the sufferings of Christ, Who hath given thee the grace to heal all diseases.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thee did Daniel describe beforehand as the unquarried mountain from which the precious Stone was cut Which grindeth to dust the temples of the idols, O Theotokos Mary.

