Also on The 11th Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr George of Sofia

If the commemoration of the holy martyr George fall outside of the Great Fast, and the superior desire to serve an all-night vigil, then let the stichera of the holy hieromartyr Blaise be chanted at Little Vespers.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Thou didst desire the beauties of heaven and didst consider transitory glory to be corrupt. And thou didst valiantly endure the multifarious tortures of the Moslems like an incorporeal being, O blessed martyr George. And now, crowned by Christ, pray thou that our souls be saved.

Having set thy mind firmly upon the rock of the Faith, thou didst in nowise waver under the assaults of the ungodly Moslems, but, strengthened by the power of Christ, thou didst show their attacks to be impotent. O divinely wise martyr George, pray that our souls be saved.

Joining chorus in the chambers of heaven and enjoying gladness now in the glory of Christ, do thou never forget thy kinsmen, but ever entreat the King of all in our behalf, O most lauded martyr George, that we may receive everlasting blessedness, and that our souls may be saved.

And 3 stichera in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Having vanquished the adversary as an invincible warrior, O passion-bearer George, thou didst vanquish the noetic foe with the weaponry of the Faith; and having lawfully completed thy race, thou hast received a crown from God. Him do thou entreat, that those who with faith celebrate thy most honored memory may be delivered from corruption and tribulations.

Imprisoned in a dungeon and strengthened by divine teaching, O passion-bearer George, thou didst in nowise submit to the infidels; wherefore, through fiery torture thou didst pass, rejoicing, over to Christ. Him do thou entreat, that those who with faith celebrate thy most honored memory may be delivered from corruption and tribulations.

By the power of Christ thou didst set at nought the assault of the enemy, O passion-bearer George, didst put the ungodly to shame by thy faith, and didst gladden the Orthodox by the triumph bestowed upon thee by Christ our God. Him do thou entreat, that those who with faith celebrate thy most honored memory may be delivered from corruption and tribulations.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Having piously armed thyself with martyric courage and a good conscience, O invincible martyr George, thou didst openly preach the words of Christ in the face of the ungodly. And strengthened by divine power, thou didst show the threats of the tyrants to be impotent. Paying no heed to the fire which burneth only for a time, but placing thy trust in the gifts of God, thou didst not sin. And now, having been accounted worthy to dwell in the mansions of heaven and to stand before the Master of all, pray that we be delivered from every attack of the enemy, and that we may be vouchsafed to stand at the right hand of God in the life to come.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is ­measured by number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera idiomela of the martyr—

*In Tone I:* The radiant martyr hath gladdened the heavenly hosts by his glorious suffering and hath moved us on earth to exalt the day of his repose. And glorifying thereon the struggles which he endured for Christ even unto death, let us cry out to him thus: Pray for us, O holy George, that we may receive a dwelling-place in paradise and great mercy.

*In Tone II:* Be glad in the Lord, O city of Sofia! Rejoice, all ye outlying lands, and with praises hymn the new athlete George, who in these latter days suffered and showed forth endurance equal to that of the ancients! Let us glorify Christ Who strengthened him and gave him victory over the adversaries, Who invested him with a splendid crown, hath imparted the fragrance of sweet savor to his relics on earth, and through his supplications giveth us great mercy.

*In Tone III:* In the struggle of martyrdom thou didst shine forth in goodly measure, and, strengthened by divine signs, thou didst destroy the power of the demons. Thou didst put to shame the teachers of Amirakhan, didst amaze the people of Serdica and the surrounding parts, and didst bring glory to the choir of martyrs, with whom thou dost now abide, invested with a crown of incorruption by the right hand of Christ, out of love for Whom thou didst commit thyself to the fire, O blessed one. Pray thou to God in our behalf, O greatmartyr George.

*In Tone IV:* By thy valiant suffering thou didst amaze the armies of the angels, who saw thee undaunted by the fire and hastening to the flame for the sake of Christ, as the three youths hastened to the Babylonian furnace. Abiding now with them, O George, be thou mindful of those who honor thee and bow down before the shrine of thy relics.

Glory…, in Tone V—

O brethren, let us hasten with love to this present festival of the glorious martyr George. Let the armies of heaven be glad, and let the clouds drop sweetness as on the day of his honorable immolation. Let the earth marvel at the all-glorious declaration of the splendid youth: “Break my body with blows and burn it with fire, but I will never deny my Christ! Sweeter is it to accept tortures, which will vouchsafe me yet greater spiritual blessings!” Who will not marvel, who will not glorify, who will not chant hymns of praise to him, saying: O martyr George, entreat God in behalf of us who honor thy memory and bow down before the shrine of thy relics, that we may be delivered from every assault of the adversary, and that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Thou art the temple and portal, the palace and throne of the King, O most honored Virgin, through whom Christ the Lord, my Deliverer, Who is the Sun of righteousness, hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, desiring to enlighten that which He fashioned by His own hand in His image. Wherefore, O most hymned one, as thou hast acquired maternal boldness before Him, entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Having relied wholly upon the Master from thy youth, thou didst desire Him; and having remained untouched by any passion, by blasphemy, boastfulness, indulgence in fables and unholy concourse, thou wast shown to be a most excellent martyr, unaffected by the assaults of martyrdom through the power of Him Who was sacrificed upon the Cross. Him do thou earnestly entreat in behalf of our souls.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

Though thy body was broken by blows, O most blessed passion-bearer George, thou didst preserve thy soul unchanged and thy mind intact; and, incarcerated in prison, thou didst learn therein to endure valiantly and to bear every type of torment applied to thee, for the sake of our Savior Who suffered on the Cross. Him do thou earnestly entreat in behalf of our souls.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Thou didst receive everlasting gladness and all-pure delight as reward for thy suffering, O glorious martyr George; and thou didst manifestly put the hordes of the ungodly to shame by thine endurance, didst gladden the choir of the pious, and didst inspire them with boldness for the sake of Christ. Him do thou earnestly entreat in behalf of our souls.

Glory…: Idiomelon, in the same tone—

Be glad, O city of the Bulgars, thou namesake of wisdom, for within thee the right victorious martyr George the all-comely shone forth in suffering; for, having manfully trampled underfoot all the machinations of the tyrannical foe, he received a crown of victory as is meet, and preached to all the people, that they bow down in worship before the one God in Trinity. To Him do we also cry out with boldness, that He bring peace to the world and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

After the Blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

In much-tried patience, O blessed martyr George, thou didst endure death by fire; and after thine end thou didst receive with the choirs of the martyrs an imperishable crown from Christ. Dwelling now in the land of the meek, as is meet, unceasingly entreat Christ God in behalf of us who with faith bow down before the shrine of thy relics. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice…”, once.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the martyr, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: The resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed by the Jews…”—

Despising earthly blessings, O glorious martyr George, thou didst desire to live in heaven, for the sake of which thou didst endure bondage, fiery immolation and a violent death. Wherefore, celebrating thy holy memory today, we cry out with love: Glory to Him Who gave thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who hath imparted sweet fragrance to thy relics and healings to all who have recourse thereto!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Stretching forth thy divine hands, wherein thou didst hold God Who had become incarnate of Thee in His goodness, O all-pure Virgin, beseech Him, that we may be delivered from perils who praise thee and cry out with love: Glory to Whom Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who issued forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath freed us through thy birthgiving!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

The choirs of the angels were amazed, O George, beholding thine opposition to the assembly of the Moslems, when thou didst say: “Nothing can separate me from the love of Christ my Savior!” And the demons were terrified, seeing thee crowned as a youth. O Christ Who strengthened him then for his brilliant struggles, enlighten our souls!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Joseph marvelled, beholding that which transcended nature, and in thy seedless conception he pondered in mind the rain which fell upon the fleece, the bush which burned with fire yet was not consumed, and the rod of Aaron which put forth branches. And, bearing witness, thy betrothed and protector cried out to the priests: “The Virgin giveth birth, yet remaineth a virgin even after birthgiving!”

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy martyr George, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

O scion of the pious Bulgars, led by the Holy Spirit thou didst forsake thy homeland, and didst arrive in the city of Serdica; and thou hadst adorned thyself with piety and righteousness, thou wast hated by the ungodly Moslems, and by all-wise discourse thou didst put to shame the arrogance with which they treated thee: Wherefore, thou didst finish thy course in fire. O martyr George, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love revere thine honored memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

When the Master of all cometh to judge the whole world, O most immaculate Theotokos, then do thou reckon me, who am condemned, among the lambs at His right hand, and rescue me from the outermost darkness, I pray, that in thanksgiving I may magnify the richness of thy goodness and, rejoicing, may cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of offenses, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God they shall blossom forth.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 36

\(Mt. 10: 16-22\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Come, ye councils of the Orthodox, and in boldness let us emulate the martyr George. Let our whole body be broken, for we have a Creator Who is able to refashion it more splendidly, only let us not repudiate the name Christian, for not in vain is that name a wellspring of living water. Let us even deprive ourselves of property and children if only we not fall away from our Lord, for he is invincible who doeth the commandments of Christ in deed and not merely in word, and spareth not his own body to acquire the pearl of great price. Wherefore, let us live as is fitting and strive to reproduce his courage on the tablets of our hearts, crying out to Christ with boldness: O Lord, through the supplications of Thy martyr vouchsafe us the good things of heaven, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “A priest weaveth praise for thee, O George”, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

O Word of God Who art all-glorious in the saints, inspire my words and illumine my mind, that, as is meet, I may hymn the new martyr George and Thee Who strengthened him.

I know thy love, O martyr, and, trusting in thee, I have made haste to offer thee hymnody. Accept it as Christ did the widow’s mite, because of my zeal, even though I lack understanding.

Seized by the ungodly, thou didst sail through the arena of tortures and didst reach the haven of the heavenly Eden, Dwelling therein, pray to the Master of all, that He remove the darkness from our souls, that we may hymn thy memory as is meet.

*Theotokion:* The compassionate and loving God the Word, Who made Adam with His own hand and fashioned Eve from his rib, became incarnate of thee, O all-pure one, was nailed to the Cross and pierced in the side, that He might mercifully set aright their fall.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having acquired an adult understanding in thy youth, O glorious George, and surpassed all thy peers in wisdom, guilelessness and humility, thou art called blessed by all the faithful.

Thou wast a new confirmation of Orthodoxy, O glorious George, a foundation of piety and the preservation of the faithful, for which cause we praise thee with hymns.

The city of Serdica hath now acquired thee as a great treasure and an adornment of its Church, O blessed George; and the whole world, hearing of thy contests, rejoiceth and, marvelling at thy struggle, calleth thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* The disobedience of Eve our first mother was healed by thine obedience, O all-pure one; for, hearkening unto the words of Gabriel, thou becamest the Mother of the Son of God, Who by His Cross hath transformed her grief into joy.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

The Creator made thee comely of countenance and adorned thee within with beauty of soul; but the enemy, unable to endure this, wished to deceive thee and make thee prey for him to devour. Yet the Author of good things invisibly strengthened thee and through thee put the deceiver to shame. Wherefore, joining chorus now in the heavens, O holy George, pray thou to the Lord in behalf of those who glorify thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same melody—

Inconceivable and unapproachable is the awesome mystery of God wrought within thee, O divinely joyous Mistress; for having conceived the Infinite One, thou gavest birth unto Him Who was clad in flesh through thine all-pure blood. With the martyrs ever beseech Him, O all-pure one, that our souls be saved.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Looking to the glory which is to come, O most honored athlete, thou didst consider transitory glory to be as nought; wherefore, nothing was able to separate thee from the love of Christ: neither imprisonment, nor the threats of the judge, nor the burning of the fire, nor yet the promise of corruptible glory.

Full of divine love, thou didst valiantly endure tortures, and having trusted in God from thy youth, thou didst not refuse to die for Him, obeying His precepts and following in His saving footsteps.

Forsaking thy kin, thou didst go to the city of Serdica; and bearing virtue within, thou wast shown to be an excellent martyr of Christ; for thou didst know that twofold honor is given unto those who acquire it.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving thou didst abolish the curse of Eve our first mother, O thou who art full of the grace of God; and thou didst blossom forth blessing for the world, bearing Christ as a flower. Wherefore, rejoicing, we confess thee to be the Theotokos.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

By thy valiant deeds he who of old boasted beyond measure that he would destroy the earth and the sea was trampled underfoot and cast down into the uttermost depths. Christ hath destroyed him by His Cross and granted victory to the faithful!

When the servants of the prideful morning-star bethought themselves how by lying words they might ensnare the valiant one and easily draw him into their service, the most wicked ones were put to shame together with him who had dispatched them.

The boastful demon could not bear the reproach of thee, a young man, and to be trampled underfoot, and he moved his servants to take thee to court, hoping to vanquish thee by fear; but the uttermost depths were afraid, beholding thee put his visible servants to shame.

*Theotokion:* The whole choir of the prophets, manifestly instructed by God, proclaimed beforehand the mystery of the ineffable conception of the Son of God through thee, O most hymned Virgin Mother; for thou didst truly give birth to the Light which is without beginning, O thou who art full of divine grace.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

Standing before the tribunal of the tyrants like an innocent lamb among wolves, thou wast not daunted by nor afraid of the gnashing of teeth directed at thee; wherefore, mindful of thy valor, we call thee blessed.

The tyrant raged with anger against thee, O blessed George, beholding thee unbowed and paying no heed to his commands; and, casting thee in chains into prison, he wished to frighten thee, but was shown to be put to shame.

When they cast thee into prison, thou didst soar aloft unto God on thy great hopes, O blessed one, and heeding the one who instructed thee to endure martyrdom, with wise worlds thou didst shut the gaping mouths of the prideful.

*Theotokion:* Arriving from heaven, the supreme commander openly announced joy unto thee, O pure one, saying: “From thee will God issue forth in the flesh, O all-pure Virgin, unto the salvation of those who hymn thee with faith.”

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Desiring the glory of heaven, O much-suffering George, thou didst revile the deceit of Islam, and, trampling it underfoot, thou didst receive the crown of victory, rejoicing now with the angels and dwelling with the martyrs. With them entreat Christ God unceasingly in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* The sun hath greatly illumined thy festival of prayer, O blessed George, illumining the faithful and driving away the dark power of the demons. Wherefore, I, the wretched one, fall down before the shrine of thy relics and pray with a pain-wracked heart, that I may receive the removal of grief and stillness of life, forgiveness of sins and the correction of my vile life, that, as is meet, I may ever hymn thee as one who art now in the heavens with the angels and martyrs. With them entreat Christ God unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with out mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ever deliver us from all misfortunes and grievous perils, O blessed martyr George, granting divine grace unto us who offer entreaty unto thee and chant unto Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Truly loving Christ God, thou didst reject the material flesh and didst manfully brave the fire; and receiving the crown of victory, thou dost ever chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Consumed by the flame of an earthly fire, thou didst quench the flame of the arrogance of the prideful, O most blessed one, and with the light of understanding thou didst illumine the pious; wherefore, in gladness we chant unto Christ Who strengthened thee: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Lift thy gaze up on high, where thy Master is, O soul, not falling headlong like the irrational beasts, but awaken out of darkness and despair, crying aloud: O Lord, through the supplications of her who gave Thee birth and of Thy martyr George, vouchsafe Thy kingdom unto me.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O most blessed George, thou hast been shown to be the confirmation of Orthodox people, the adornment of the Churches of God, and the fervent help of those who have recourse unto thee and chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

I offer thee mental entreaty, O George: By thy supplications deliver me from cruel misfortunes, illumine me with the light of knowledge divine, and guide me to the paths of God, for I cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou wast truly shown to be a city set upon a hill and a lamp shining upon a lampstand, O glorious martyr, illumining those who walk in the night of life and guiding to the path of salvation those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* As many of us as are tossed about on the deep of sin, let us hasten to the calm haven of the Mother of God who, through the divine power of her Son, guideth to salvation all who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Assembling together, all the people of the parts of city of Serdica splendidly glorify thy sacred memory with voices of song; wherefore, accept these hymns, even though they are unworthy, for, having thee as a mediator before Christ the Savior, we have hastened to offer thy hymnody unto thee.

O martyr, direct unto God the petitions of thy servants, which we have offered unto thee with all the desire of our hearts, and by thy supplications unto God deliver those who honor thine all-radiant memory from misfortunes and perils.

Thou didst bravely endure the burning fire for the sake of Christ, and protected by His love thou didst receive mighty steadfastness in thy heart and the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, forget not us who honor thee with love, O divinely wise crown-bearer George.

Let the all-glorious martyr George, who put the Moslems to shame by the wisdom of the Spirit of God, who was glorified by enduring a fiery death for Christ’s sake, and ever prayeth for his native land, be hymned by us with divine songs as is meet.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, thou didst bear in thine arms as a babe Him Whom the Father begat before the morning-star, and Who in latter times became incarnate for us, ungrateful though we are. With the martyrs entreat Him in behalf of those who praise thee with faith.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples…”—

Like a fragrant flower in the valleys, like a tree planted by rivers of waters, did the martyr George shine forth splendidly in virtues and sufferings. Wherefore, rendered fragrant of soul, with radiant countenance we cry out to him: Rejoice, O seal of athletes and help of the faithful!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Daniel described thee beforehand as the unquarried mountain from whence, without the aid of men’s hands, the all-precious Stone was cut Who crushed all the deception of idolatry. And in thy train the choirs of the martyrs have been led into the fragrance of thy peace. With them pray thou for us, O all-pure Mary, Virgin Mother.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

When, called from on high by divine providence, thou wast enflamed by divine desire, thou didst spurn all things in this life and didst strive to do the commandments of God, neither fearing the threats of the tyrants nor being deceived by delight in quickly fleeting things, but desiring the good things which pass not away, which thou hast received, rejoicing, in the kingdom of Christ our God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

When the iniquitous ones cast thee into prison, then, strengthened from on high by the power of the Spirit, thou didst show thyself to be as strong as adamant, ready to endure tortures bravely, to preach Christ with wisdom, and, as a faithful servant, to set thy hope on Him. And in this thou didst not err, for thou hast won a dwelling-place with the choirs of the martyrs and hast been crowned by Christ our God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

By the providence of the Most High the ungodly brought thee to trial, O much-suffering George, and with lying words desired to ensnare thee; but thou didst put their deception greatly to shame and didst openly preach the Gospel of Christ. And He strengthened thee and preserved thy body unharmed by the fire, while He caused thy soul to dwell in the kingdom of heaven. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

The providence of the Most High tried the endurance of thy soul like gold in fire, and He cast the firmness of thy faith in God and thy love, the divine queen of the virtues, into an excellent ornament for the kingdom of heaven. And he did not permit thy body to be consumed by the fire, but preserved it unharmed, as a treasure of great price and a source of grace for those who flee unto Christ our God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Come, O ye faithful, and let us all hasten to the honored memorial of the all-glorious athlete George, who shone forth in the city of Serdica. For, lo! his most precious relics lie before us, emitting waves of sweet fragrance and glorifying our Faith; and his spirit, dwelling in the heavenly mansions, receiveth the enjoyment of the good things which God hath prepared for those who love Him. And standing in gladness before the throne of the Master, he prayeth for those who with faith and love revere his most honored memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the martyr.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

A Reading from the Epistle to Timothy, § 292 \(II Tim. 2: 1-10\)

Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God shall they blossom forth.

Reading from the Gospel According to John, §52, \(Jn. 15:17-16:2\).

The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth Me hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

