Also on The 12th Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints,

Alexis, Metropolitan of Moscow

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, accepting the voice of the Word, thou didst disdain the things of the body, forsaking the pleasures and properties of life, and, traversing the noetic sea by the teaching of piety and supernatural thunderings, thou didst serve Christ, O thou who art blessed of God. *Twice*

O all-wise wonder-worker Alexis, thou didst please God by thy monastic life, for God chose thee beforehand, from thy youth, O father, to be a shepherd for His reason-endowed sheep and a great teacher. Thou hast been shown to be an instructor of priests and an all-radiant star for the whole land of Russia, illumining with miracles all who with faith fall down before the shrine of thy relics. Wherefore, we pray: Ask thou for thy flock remission of sins, O father blessed of God.

O venerable father, holy hierarch Alexis, by thine appearance in a dream thou didst restore the paralytic to health, strengthening his arms and legs, saying unto the afflicted one: “If thou dost not quickly give up the hidden treasure, thou shalt not rise from thy bed.” And he, arriving at thine honored shrine with repentance and tears, received healing, O father blessed of God.

Glory…, idiomelon, in the same tone—

O assemblies of Russia, come ye to the honored memorial of Alexis the wonder-worker, to the divine temple, wherein lieth his precious shrine, which hath within it the grace of healings, his priceless body; and let us cry aloud to him: O great and holy hierarch Alexis the wonder-worker, thou art the boast of the land of Russia, thou art its defense, thou art an inexhaustible treasury of the gifts of the Spirit, and ever-flowing fountain of healings; wherefore, chanting, we say: Rejoice, pillar and ground of the Church! Rejoice, O thou who standest before the throne of Christ with the first hierarchs! Rejoice, most radiant beacon illumining the faithful with miracles! Wherefore, O our honored and holy hierarch, pray to Christ, the God of all, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

O God-bearing holy hierarch Alexis, from earliest infancy thou wast shown to be a sanctified vessel and the abode of the all-holy Spirit.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Rejoice, O blessed Alexis, thou boast of hierarchs, glory of priests, model for monastics, confirmation of the Church!

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly rejoice.

Hearken to the entreaty of thy children, O holy hierarch father Alexis, and disdain not their tears, but fulfill the heartfelt petitions of those who love thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O joyous Virgin who for the world hast given birth to Joy: Christ the Bestower of life, and hast taken away the grief of our first mother!

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

Hastening to thy precious shrine, O holy hierarch Alexis, divinely wise wonder-worker, assembling with love, we celebrate with splendor the memory of thee who art equally enthroned with the apostles, the all-good physician, the right pleasing servant; and we rejoice with songs and hymns, glorifying Christ Who hath given thee such grace to heal and hath bestowed upon thy city so great a bulwark.

Another troparion, in Tone IV—

Celebrating the memory of the all-blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, the careful preserver of the dogmas of the apostles, the shepherd and teacher of the Church of Russia, let us glorify with right fitting hymnody Christ our God Who hath given us His favored one as an abundant wellspring pouring forth healings, the boast and confirmation of the city of Moscow.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, O great and all-honorable hierarch, all-blessed Alexis, adorner of the Church, precious ornament of the holy hierarchs, who helpest Orthodox Christians by thy supplications, O great confirmation of the land of Russia, our honored teacher, help of the helpless, joyous consolation of the grieving, fervent advocate for all who sorrow, who drivest away the darkness of ignorance! Thou hast hastened to Christ at the calm havens, and, standing among the choir of the incorporeal ones, dost delight in the beauteous comeliness of the Master, and hast moved the hearts of the pious to hymnody. Pray thou to Christ, that He grant peace and great mercy unto our souls.

Rejoice, O beacon of the whole metropolitan see of Russia! For thou hast blossomed forth splendidly in virtue, like a fruitful olive-tree in the house of God, and, producing divers fruits, thou dost distribute them in abundance among thy flock, and amid the pastures of the Spirit thou givest drink to them with the downpouring of thy prayers and freely pourest forth healings upon those who with faith have recourse to the shrine of thy relics, O holy hierarch Alexis. Thou hast prepared thyself as a bright lamp, and, making thine abode in the mansions of heaven, hast received crowns as the reward of thy labors; for thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst sleep the common sleep of all. O venerable hierarch, pray to Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Rejoice and be glad, O all-sacred Alexis, gracious preacher, steadfast intellect, grapes of the vine of life sprung forth in holiness, exuding wine which gladdeneth the hearts of the faithful with mellifluous teachings, O head of hallowed anointing, our honored teacher! Come thou and visit us, who are oppressed by sinful passions; cast down the audacity of the heathen; drive away the adversary; calm civil strife, and ease all pain and illness, praying to Christ, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

Rejoice, O all-glorious city of Moscow! Adorn thyself and be glad, possessing such an inexhaustible wellspring of grace, the all-blessed and wondrous great hierarch Alexis, who was adorned with the wisdom of the Holy Spirit and from his youth, through fasting and prayer, and because of his virtuous life, became the vessel of the Holy Spirit, anointed with the oil of the priesthood, and received the gift of healing from Christ God, the King of all, and even after his repose restored to health the boy whose mother brought him, barely alive, to his precious shrine. And he now poureth forth healing in abundance upon those who approach him with faith, and prayeth to Christ, that He grant peace and great mercy unto our souls.

And 4 stichera in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise…”—

With what beauties of song shall we hymn the holy hierarch, the gentle mouth of Christ, the splendid proclaimer of His Gospel, the guardian of the Church, the helper of the Russian land, the champion of all Orthodox Christians? By his supplications may Christ, Who hath great mercy, cast down the pride of the enemy. *Twice*

With what vigilant lips shall we praise the holy hierarch Alexis, the wonder-worker, the adorner of the Church of Christ, who loved the preëminent Peter and became the heir of Paul, who emulated the ways of the Baptist, the co-ruler of Russia, who emitteth rays of miracles in abundance and freely granteth healing unto all who approach him with faith and celebrate his memorial with splendor, the great helper and teacher of the Russian land, the wondrous and miraculous Alexis, the ally of all Orthodox Christians? For his sake Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down our enemies.

With what eloquent words shall we hymn Alexis, the holy hierarch wondrous in miracles, who dwelleth with the incorporeal beings, who was sanctified from earliest infancy, the immovable pillar of the Church, the joy of the land of Russia, the model of righteousness, the helper of the oppressed, the physician of the sick who exacteth no fee? For his sake Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath bestowed unity upon the Churches.

Glory…:, in Tone VI—

Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with songs of praise let us hymn the adornment of hierarchs and ornament of the fathers, the wellspring of miracles, the great helper of the Russian land, saying: Rejoice, O Alexis, thou steadfast intelligence imbued with the grace of truth! For, having become a receptacle of the all-holy Spirit, thou hast received the gift of miracles. And now, standing before the throne of Christ with the first hierarchs, pray thou for thy servants.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the saint, idiomela, in Tone VIII—

O venerable father, holy hierarch Alexis, though other lands and cities fall silent, yet all who have been enlightened by thee, and we with them, hearing of and seeing the multitude of thy miracles, cry aloud in hymns of praise and say: Through the grace of the all-holy Spirit thou becamest an emulator of the apostles of Christ and illuminest the whole world; wherefore, accounts of thy wonders reached the tsar like a ray of light, shining upon those afar off as though they were near. By thy supplications free us from tribulations and the cruel ones who assail us.

Who can recount the labors of thy boldness, O venerable father? And who is not amazed, hearing of thy boundless humility, patience and love for thy children? For thou wast in nowise at a loss when thou didst hear the demand of the iniquitous ruler, who said: “Send unto me the one who imparteth health to the sick and sight to the blind, who enableth the lame to walk, and expelleth demons! Yea, send him unto me, that he may pray to his God and heal my queen, driving out the demon and bringing light to her eyes.” O the demand which transcended human understanding! O the wonder! Who will not be amazed, O brethren? Who will not praise this mighty warrior? For not only did he not hesitate, but encouraging those with him, he said: “Wait a little while, and be not sorrowful, but set your hope on God and His all-pure Mother, and ye shall behold the glory of God!”

O Alexis, holy hierarch of Christ, thou good disciple of Christ the good Teacher, thou didst emulate Christ the good Shepherd, laying down thy life for the sheep, didst transform the rage of the ruler, which was like the lion’s roar, into the meekness of a lamb, didst heal his queen and change the sorrow of thy flock into joy, didst bring about peace for the Church and gladden the great prince. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Pray for us to Christ, the Master Who loveth mankind, that He save our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

When thou didst return from the khan, bearing peace for the Church, O father, the hierarchs and assemblies of the clergy and people greeted thee with joy and in thanksgiving called thee their liberator. Bearing gifts, with joy they paid homage to thee as one victorious; and the Great Prince Demetrius cried out to thee, weeping: “O master, what shall we render unto thee for thy labor, whereby thou hast brought us peace?” Wherefore, O holy hierarch Alexis, pray thou earnestly to Christ our God, that thy city be preserved from siege.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

The Archangel Gabriel was sent from heaven to announce the conception to the Virgin; and, arriving in Nazareth, he thought to himself, marvelling at the miracle: “How can He Who in the highest is unapproachable be born of the Virgin? How can He who hath heaven for His throne and the earth for His footstool be contained in the Virgin’s womb? How can He, upon Whom the six-winged seraphim and many-eyed cherubim dare not gaze, will to become incarnate of her by His word alone? Yet this is the true Word of God. Why, therefore, do I stand here and not say unto the Virgin: ‘Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee! Rejoice, O pure Virgin! Rejoice, O unwedded bride! Rejoice, O mother of Life! Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!’?”

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

O Alexis, thou hast shown thyself to be the habitation of the Holy Spirit and dwelling-place of grace. And, assembling now for thy memorial, we hymn thee.

*Stichos:* The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

Thou art the boast of hierarchs, the adornment of priests, a model for monks; and we cry aloud to thee, O holy hierarch Alexis: Rejoice, thou confirmation of the Church!

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Accept now, O father, the hymnody of thy children who celebrate with faith, and grant unto those who love thee those petitions which are for their profit.

Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone VI—

O good servant, faithful husbandman of the vineyard of Christ, thou didst endure the heat of the day, didst increase the talant given thee, and didst not resent those who came after thee. Wherefore, the gates of heaven have been opened unto thee. Enter into the joy of thy Lord, and pray for us, O holy Alexis.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Hastening to thy precious shrine, O holy hierarch Alexis, divinely wise wonder-worker, assembling with love, we celebrate with splendor the memory of thee who art equally enthroned with the apostles, the all-good physician, the right pleasing servant; and we rejoice with songs and hymns, glorifying Christ Who hath given thee such grace to heal and hath bestowed upon thy city a great bulwark. *Twice*

And, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

AT MATINS

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

The radiant day hath dawned: the memorial of Archbishop Alexis the wonder-worker! Come ye, and assembling, let us celebrate with splendor: let us form choirs and honor him with praises; and let us say: Rejoice, O honored luminary of the Russian land, for thou pourest forth miracles and impartest healings, and prayest for our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

That Thou mightest restore Thine image, which had been corrupted by the passions, O Savior, hiding Thyself from the celestial beings, Thou becamest incarnate of the Virgin. To her do we cry aloud together: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Come, let us hold festival with splendor, O ye who celebrate the memory of the hierarch and wonder-worker Alexis; for he hath passed from earth to the immaterial mansions, where he beholdeth ineffable beauty, as a converser with the angelic armies. Wherefore, joining chorus with the apostles and martyrs, O our venerable father Alexis, earnestly beseech Christ the Master in behalf of those who honor thy memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou art the insuperable rampart of us Christians, O Virgin Theotokos; for, fleeing to thee, we remain unharmed. And though we sin again, we have thee as our advocate. Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Alexis, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...: Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

The metropolitan see of Russia now proclaimeth thy wonders, O father, and all lands and countries thy miracles, whereby thou deliverest all from sorrowful afflictions, O Alexis blessed of God, thou feeder of widows and father of orphans, most excellent helper of the troubled, comfort of those who weep, shepherd and guide of all the lost. O venerable Alexis, by thy supplications deliver us also from misfortunes, and pray to Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith and love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O thou who at the angel’s word received the Joy of the world! Rejoice, O thou who gavest birth to thy Creator and Lord! Rejoice, O thou who wast counted worthy to become the Mother of God!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \[Jn. 10: 9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep have I, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Inexhaustible is the grace of the holy hierarch Alexis, which he received from Christ, the God of all. Wherefore, by the power of God his precious relics continually work miracles and deliver from incurable sickness all who with faith call upon his name. By his supplications, O Lord, grant victory to all Orthodox Christians over the enemy, and free us from the tribulations of soul and body which assail us, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

On the chariot of Thy grace bear our thoughts aloft from those things which are below to that which is on high, O Lord, and grant that we may praise thy favored one, the holy hierarch Alexis, who chanteth hymns to thee our God.

On the chariot of thy mediations carry aloft, from earthly things to that which is heavenly, our mind, which is weighed down by the griefs of life; and instruct us how to praise thee worthily, O father Alexis, who chanted unto God a hymn of victory.

By thy humility thou didst surpass the chariot of the pride of this world, and, taking up thy cross, didst follow Christ in goodness; and, arriving at the haven of life on high, thou chantest unto God a hymn of victory.

On the chariot of the virtues thou didst ascend to heaven, as Elijah did on the chariot of fire. Wherefore, entreat God, that He send down like a mantle the grace of the Spirit, which teacheth us to chant unto God a hymn of victory.

*Theotokion:* O fiery chariot who bore within thy womb the incarnate Word of God, beseech Him earnestly, that thy servants be saved who have recourse unto thee and chant to God a hymn of victory.

Canon II, the composition of Hieromonk Epiphanius Slavinitsky, a theologian who lived in the saint’s monastery, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us chant unto Christ God, Who wrought wondrous miracles in the midst of the Red Sea, for of old He caused armèd Israel to traverse the impassable on foot, and drowned Pharaoh, the worker of evil, in the depths.

O divinely wise Alexis, thou golden lamp of the Church illumined in godly manner by the divinely radiant beams of the light of the three Hypostases, we entreat thee: With the radiant beams of thy supplications enlighten the minds of those who praise thee, that they may offer thee fitting laudation.

O thrice blessed Alexis, thou earthly angel who dost emulate Christ, godly minded converser with the angels of heaven, divinely crowned vanquisher of the angels of hell, who wast vouchsafed to behold God incarnate, the Angel of great Counsel, we beseech thee: By thy God-inspired entreaties deliver us from the assaults of the soul-destroying hosts of hades.

Drowning in the midst of a tempest of the bitter waters of soul-destroying transgressions, we flee unto thee, as to the right wondrous stiller of the raging sea, and cry aloud: O holy Alexis, by thy God-pleasing prayers still thou the tumultuous sea of our passions.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, thou radiant cloud who hast caused the Rain of heaven, the incarnate Word of God, to fall upon us: With the divinely flowing water of thy compassion quench thou the fiery flame of our harmful passions.

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

The Lord of the vault of heaven and all creation, knowing from of old that thou wouldst be a good pastor, O father Alexis, entrusted to thee His reason-endowed flock, in that He alone loveth mankind.

Loving the Creator of the vault of heaven, and having made thyself light by fasting, thou didst pass over the sea of the passions; and having ascended to the summit of dispassion by the virtues, thou didst behold God, Who alone loveth mankind.

Having ascended to the heights of the vault of heaven by knowledge of God, thou didst there noetically behold ineffable things, and didst receive the gift of working miracles from God Who loveth mankind.

*Theotokion:* To thee, O all-pure one, did Gabriel announce that the Creator of the vault of heaven would be born of thee, crying: Rejoice, O Virgin! The Lord, Who alone loveth mankind, is with thee!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Let the vainglorious sage boast not, but let him consider this: There is none as holy as God, Who exalteth our horn, granting might to our rulers.

We entreat thee, the divinely wise helmsman who, with the heavenly steering of the Word of God didst pilot the ship of the Church of Russia straight to the right calm harbor of life everlasting; and we bless thee, saying: O most honored Alexis, guide thou our souls to the right fair stillness of repentance.

O thou who profitably kept the soul-saving commandment of the omnipotent Creator and by thy prayer stilled the stormy waves of the raging sea, by thy wondrous intercession still thou the raging storm of our tribulations.

O right wondrous Alexis, thou river of God flowing with gold, who with the heavenly waters of the teaching of the Gospel abundantly watered the garden of the Church of Russia: with the stream of spiritual joy flowing from heaven give drink to our afflicted souls.

*Theotokion:* Theologizing in the divinely created firmament of the Church of the apostles, we flee to thee, the radiant heaven of the never-waning Sun, crying: O most hymned Virgin, with thy heavenly aid help us who call thee blessed, that we may come to dwell in the mansions of heaven.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

In God-pleasing manner, with the divinely inspired shepherd’s staff of correction thou didst, as a good pastor, guide to the straight path of salvation the reason-endowed flock of Christ, which had grazed on the fragrant pasturage of the Word of God; and thou wast counted worthy to receive the incorrupt reward of life everlasting from Christ God, the Chief Shepherd, in the heavenly Sion. Him do thou beseech, O right wondrous Alexis, that we, thy rational sheep, may be preserved from the ravening invisible wolves.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Thy sacred head was anointed by the divine Spirit, O hierarch Alexis, and grace descended abundantly upon thee, and remained like myrrh upon thy head, running down as upon the beard of Aaron, descending like the dew of Hermon, bedewing with drops of thy benefactions those who have recourse to thy relics and cry out earnestly unto thee: O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory as is meet.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Mystically pondering in mind that which was commanded, the incorporeal one presented himself without delay in the house of Joseph, and said unto her who knew not wedlock: “He Who bowed the heavens down by His descent shall be immutably contained wholly within thy womb! And beholding Him assuming the guise of a servant in thy womb, I am afraid to cry to thee: Rejoice, O Bride unwedded!”

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

“Thou art my strength, O Lord! Thou art my power!”, thou didst cry, O father Alexis. And thou didst receive the gift of healing bodily infirmities and dispelling evil spirits from those who cry out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou art the beacon of the land of Russia and the impregnable rampart of the city of Moscow, the vanquisher of their enemies, and an ally in battle for all Orthodox Christians who cry out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou didst theologize concerning the uncreated Unity which existeth in three Persons, unconfused and indivisible, O father Alexis, teaching thy flock to cry out unceasingly: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* Thou art truly my strength and salvation, O Theotokos, and on thee have I set my hope. Save me, O pure Virgin, and strengthen me, that I may cry out to Him Who was born of thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Taught beforehand by a right eloquent voice, Habbakuk beheld the incarnation of the Word and cried aloud: I have heard the sound of the counsel of God! For God shall immutably hold converse with men, ­becoming incarnate of the Virgin’s womb, delivering the world from the primal curse!

O right wondrous Alexis, thou divinely wise fisherman who with godly success didst catch an incalculable multitude of fish with the divinely fashioned net of the direction of thy wise humility, with the divinely wrought hook of thine intercession draw us forth from the deep abyss of manifold evils.

O right wondrous Alexis, thou healer who exacteth no fee, who with the heavenly salve of the word of God didst treat the soul-corrupting sores of the people’s falls into sin, and didst cure their maddening wounds with the divinely prepared poultice of thy meek correction, we beseech thee: Heal thou the stripes of our sins, which harm our souls.

O most honored Alexis, thou right fruitful tree of the garden planted by God, who hast produced the fragrant fruits of right laudable corrections and lifted up to heaven the fruit-laden branches of thine entreaties which are hearkened to by God, we implore thee: With the godly growth of the leaves of thy protection shelter us from the harmful heat of cruel misfortunes.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, thou golden ray of the never-waning Light, to thee do we flee, crying aloud: With the luminous radiance of thy defense dispel the dark cloud of our griefs.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Wherefore have the adversary arrayed themselves against us who have thee as a mighty champion? O father Alexis, cast down their audacity, and by thy supplication show forth all Orthodox Christians as fearsome to them.

Wherefore are we despondent, weighed down with a multitude of griefs, while we have as the consoler of our sorrows the holy hierarch Alexis, who delivereth us from our misfortunes and tribulations, from enemies visible and invisible?

Wherefore do bodily infirmities assail us and misfortunes surround us who have thee, O father Alexis, as a physician amid our ailments and a comforter amid sorrows? Therefore, rescue us from them by thy supplications.

*Theotokion:* Wherefore do the billows of the passions bestorm me, O most immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to Christ the Helmsman? Beseech Him, that He rescue me therefrom and guide my steps to the ways of His commandments, I pray.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Enlighten the gloom of my soul, which is darkened by the mire of the passions which assail me at night, that I may rise early unto Thee Who alone art compassionate, and cut asunder the bonds of my debts, that, illumined by Thine equally eternal Spirit, I may find the incorrupt way of the righteousness of Thy precepts.

O most blessed Alexis, thou good shepherd who in God-pleasing manner fed the reason-endowed flock of Christ on the fragrant verdure of the teaching of the Gospel and didst guide them divinely to the straight path of the life of the emulation of Christ, we entreat thee: By thy supplications guide us to the straight path of the commandments of God.

O divinely wise father Alexis, thou divinely wrought vessel of the Holy Spirit, in godly splendor covered over with the pure gold of the love of God, who abundantly enrichest thy children with the purified silver of the word of God, we beseech thee: By thy supplications grant us the heavenly riches of the grace of God.

O sacred leader Alexis, divinely wise mind, member of the godly choir of the heavenly intelligences, illumined in godly manner with the divinely radiant rays of the light of the three Hypostases: with the heavenly beams of thy divinely revealed wisdom enlighten our darkened souls from on high.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Virgin, thou divinely planted vine who hast put forth the divinely planted Cluster, the incarnate Word of God, we entreat thee: With the fragrant wine of the grace of God give drink to our thirsty souls.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Cleanse us of our many sins, O Savior, and by the supplications of Thy holy hierarch Alexis drive away our illnesses, and grant peace and unity to Thy Churches.

Cleanse our hearts and thoughts by thy mediations, O father, and, accepting the prayers directed to thee by us, ask of Christ that He show us great mercy.

Having cleansed thy heart and sharpened the pen of thy tongue with the Spirit, O father Alexis, by thy teachings thou didst inscribe the word of divine knowledge upon the hearts of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* The Archangel Gabriel, perceiving thee to be purified by the Spirit, O most immaculate one, cried out to thee: “Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, thou restoration of the fallen and annulment of the curse!”

Canon II

*Irmos:* Thou hast hearkened to the sound of my cry from the belly of hades, and hast brought me up from the corruption of the tempest of transgressions, O Good One. And as of old Thou didst lead Jonah up from corruption, O Lord, go Thou before me, I pray, and save me.

O most blessed Alexis, thou golden star of Russia who hast splendidly illumined the divinely wrought firmament of the Church of God with the bright beams of thine apostolic corrections and with godly success hast dispelled the gloomy darkness of the assaults of the barbarians: dispel the dark cloud of the assaults of the enemy.

O God-bearing Alexis, thou noetic temple of God, who with divine zeal erected material temples of God to the majestic glory of the immaterial God, we beseech thee: By thy God-pleasing entreaties fashion our hearts into temples of God fit for His dwelling.

O most wondrous Alexis, thou right fruitful root of a heavenly tree, who uprooted the pernicious thorns of prideful pretension and with godly success didst plant the goodly saplings of humble-minded contemplation of God: Plant thou in our hearts the divinely growing root of God-pleasing humility.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, who gavest birth to the incarnate Word of God, the almighty Stiller of the waves of the sea: By the celestial calm of thine aid still thou the most tempestuous tumult of our sorrows.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

O all ye people, hymning with faith the new wonder-worker Alexis, the godly and all-­honorable hierarch of Christ, let us bless him with love, as a great pastor, an all-wise minister and teacher of the land of Russia. And hastening today to his memorial, let us joyfully give utterance to a hymn to the God-bearer: As thou hast boldness before God, deliver us from all manner of evil circumstances, that we may cry to thee: Rejoice, O confirmation of our city!

*Ikos:* Beholding the miracles of the wondrous and all-honorable wonder-worker, who granteth healing to all who with all their soul have recourse unto him with faith, who invisibly visiteth the people of Christ and illumineth the Russian land, joyously assembling before the shrine of his relics with all our soul, beholding and hearing of the multitude of his miracles and the inexhaustible wellspring of his healings, and with all our soul offering the fruits of the virtues like sweet-smelling incense, with pure heart and enlightened minds, rejoicing let us cry unto him, saying: Rejoice, O honored father, our teacher, for thou hast received the reward of thy labors, and dwellest in the highest, entreating in our behalf God Who loveth mankind! Thou hast received the gift of working miracles, and art the father and teacher of the land of Russia, the excellent boast of hierarchs, and the mighty ally of all Orthodox Christians. Rejoice, O holy hierarch Alexis, thou confirmation of our city!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Emulating the children from Judæa, thou didst utterly consume the fiery passions, O blessed Alexis, ever chanting unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst emulate the children from Judæa; for, illumined by the grace of the Spirit which abode in thee, thou didst chant unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

We emulate the children from Judæa, beholding thy relics pouring forth miracles, and afire with love for Christ, we cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* The children from Judæa prefigured thy birthgiving, O most pure Virgin; for the fire in the furnace did not consume them, who chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon II

*Irmos:* The Assyrian flame, portraying Thee, O Lord, saved the three youths, just as the divine Spark did not consume the Virgin Maiden at Thy divine nativity. O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O hierarch Alexis, thou physician who exactest no fee, we earnestly beseech thee, as one who freely received the gift of healing from the heavenly Physician, and thus hast freely healed the harmful wounds of those who have recourse unto thee: With the heavenly treatment of thine entreaties heal thou the grievous infirmities of our souls and bodies.

O most praised Alexis, thou divinely woven robe of Orthodox piety, adorned in godly manner with the priceless pearls of the greatest of virtues: Entreat God Who arrayeth Himself in light, that our souls may be clad in the splendid robe of life everlasting.

O holy Alexis, tireless laborer in the garden established by God, who hast planted the fragrant cassia of right wondrous corrections, and hast rooted the divinely growing myrrh of ascetic temperance in thy God-loving heart: Pour forth the heavenly stacte of thy defense upon the hearts of us who love thee.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Virgin, thou radiant moon illumined by the divinely effulgent Sun of righteousness, and revealed in a manner beyond the comprehension of the heavenly intelligences: With the bright radiance of thy grace enlighten our darkened hearts.

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Thou didst teach thy flock to praise the King of heaven, crying: Hymn Christ and exalt Him supremely forever!

Entreat the King of heaven in behalf of us, thy children, who joyously hymn and exalt Him supremely forever.

Standing before the King of heaven, look down upon thy flock, who hymn and exalt Christ supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou gavest birth to the King of heaven, Whom the angels hymn and exalt supremely forever.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Emulating the children who entered the flame at the command of the iniquitous tyrant, let us cry aloud in praise, with lips never stilled: O Good One, Who art holy transcending nature, with Thy noetic light illumine those who hymn Thee!

O most blessed Alexis, thou divinely wise healer of infirmities of body and soul, who supernaturally healed the bodily blindness of the barbarian queen with the heavenly cure of thy God-pleasing prayer, we entreat thee: Heal thou the spiritual blindness of our pernicious transgressions.

O most honored Alexis, thou adornment of the Church, all-sanctified head, unshakable pillar of piety, foundation of the Faith established by God, inexhaustible abyss of divine wonders: with the gold-bearing waters of thine entreaties quench thou the ruinous fire of our griefs.

Having in God-pleasing manner burned up the pernicious weeds of sinful falls with the divine fire of the love of God, and reverently approached the immaterial and supernatural fire of the life-creating Trinity with the godly tread of faith, O venerable father Alexis, from the fire of Gehenna deliver the souls of thy children, who call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned Virgin Theotokos, who truly gavest birth, in manner past the recounting of man, to everlasting Life, the incarnate Word of God, we beseech thee: Deliver us, thy servants, from everlasting death.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou hast truly been shown forth to the world as a light radiant with the virtues, and becamest an excellent shepherd for thy flock, magnifying Christ.

O father, we truly know thee to be a great wonder-worker who pourest forth many miracles upon those who have recourse unto thee with faith and magnify Christ.

Kings and hierarchs, and all the people truly celebrate the memorial of the holy hierarch Alexis with splendor, magnifying Christ God.

*Theotokion:* Thou art truly the salvation of Christians; for thou gavest birth to Christ, Who saveth us who magnify thee as the pure Virgin.

Canon II

*Irmos:* In thee, O Theotokos, hath our degradation come to an end; for, having received the invisible Word within thy womb, thou gavest birth to Him as a both God and man, though the cherubim dare not gaze upon Him. Wherefore, we magnify thee, O all-pure one.

O most honored Alexis, first enthroned hierarch who with godly splendor adorned thy divinely established cathedra with the right comely beauty of hierarchal corrections: Entreat God Who sitteth upon the heavenly thrones, that we who bless thee may be counted worthy to stand before the throne of God in the kingdom of heaven.

Eagerly hastening to thy wonder-working relics, O right wondrous Alexis, thou wellspring of miracles, we beseech thee: With the divinely flowing stream of thy divine wonders quench the burning crucible of our tribulations and griefs.

With sovereign peace defend all Orthodox Christians from every misfortune, O most blessed Alexis, primatial hierarch, thou divinely wrought shield of Orthodoxy; and from on high grant help to our pious bishops, for the good estate of the Churches of God.

*Theotokion:* O most holy Virgin, thou bush unconsumed, which Moses the God-beholder saw on Sinai, who gavest birth to the incarnate Word of God: with the heavenly fire of the love of God melt thou our frozen hearts.

Exapostilarion—

The grace of the Holy Spirit dwelling within thee showed thee forth as a hierarch; and Christ entrusted His flock to thee, to nurture them on the pastures of the Spirit; and for His sake thou didst strive to instruct the people, and now dwellest, rejoicing, in the heavens. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having thee as our hope after God, O all-pure Theotokos, we beseech thee: By thine entreaties to Him Who was born of thee preserve us unharmed until the end.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you…”—

What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Alexis? Star shining upon the earth, most honored adornment of the world, enlightening it with the rays of the precepts of the right Faith, and driving away the darkness of heresy. Pray thou, O venerable one, that those who celebrate thy memory with faith may be delivered from corruption and misfortunes. *Twice*

What shall we call thee, O venerable and holy hierarch Alexis? River pouring forth healings in abundance upon all who approach thee with faith; wellspring gushing forth mellifluous teachings spreading to all the ends of the earth and ­enlightening the faithful. Pray thou, O venerable one, that our souls be saved.

What now shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Alexis, thou all-wondrous worker of miracles? Wise physician who chargeth no fee, who healeth every affliction of soul and body and art the peer of the incorporeal ones. Pray thou, O venerable one, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O man of God, faithful servant and minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, chosen vessel, pillar and foundation of the Church, heir of Christ: Cease thou never to cry out for us to the Lord.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Thee do we beseech: Pray thou, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335

\[Heb. 13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

