The 16th Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Pamphilus

& Those with Him

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Let Pamphilus and Seleucius, together with Valens and Paul, Porphyrius, Theodulus and Julian, and the company of the five Egyptians be melodiously hymned with faith as a harp of twelve strings.

Exalted splendidly in the Faith of Christ by divine glory, O glorious Pamphilus, thou wast shown to be the goodly adornment of Cæsaria, being therein an all-beloved hierarch, in accordance with thy name, a most honored athlete and a faithful martyr.

O mighty Pamphilus, thou didst assemble a company of valiant athletes, twelve in number, who showed themselves to be a godly army. And vanquishing the enemy together, ye were taken to the Lord in divers ways, reposing amid your martyrdom.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

With the staff of thine intercession, O pure Theotokos, drive from my wretched soul the bestial passions, guiding me peacefully toward life; and add me to the holy flock of thy chosen sheep.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

When the immaculate Virgin beheld her Lamb uplifted upon the Cross, she cried out, lamenting: “O my sweet child, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy palm art nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “The assembly of the twelve martyrs do I hymn”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

The company of twelve, brought together by the power of the All-holy Spirit, mightily vanquished the ungodly and evil horde of the wicked, in that they were victorious.

Wounded, the enemy was put to shame by the martyred athletes; for the deceiver, though he bitterly emptied his quiver, was unable to bring down those most valiant in might.

Adorned with wisdom, O martyrs of Christ, with divine understanding ye trampled the wrath of pagan arrogance underfoot, and the opponents of piety were unable to oppose it.

*Theotokion:* Most piously rendering glory, we continually magnify thee, O most hymned Theotokos, as the cloud who hath shone forth upon us the Sun of righteousness, the only-begotten Son of the Father.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Thou didst shine forth piously in deed and word, and in the precious anointing of the priesthood, O divinely wise Pamphilus, martyr of Christ.

Ye were like a most reverent harp, strung with confession and sounding forth in hymnody, O assembled martyrs of Christ.

Hastening to the understanding of your heavenly and honored calling, as victors ye received a crown from the Master.

*Theotokion:* He Who dwelleth in the highest made His abode within thee, O all-pure one, in manner surpassing nature; for, receiving flesh from thee, He robed Himself therein.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

The choir of the twelve godly martyrs, having truly arrayed themselves steadfastly against the tyrannical enemy, vanquished them with the weapons of faith; and invested by God with a crown, they have joined the choirs of the angels. With them they ever make entreaty, that those who bless them may be delivered from tribulations, sorrows and everlasting torments.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Joseph marvelled, beholding that which is beyond nature; and, pondering thy seedless conception, O Theotokos, he brought to mind the rain on the fleece, the bush which was not consumed by the fire, and the rod of Aaron which budded forth. And, bearing witness, thy betrothed and protector cried out to the priests: The Virgin giveth birth, yet remaineth virgin even after giving birth!

Stavrotheotokion—

The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the Lamb Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was wounded with shafts of grief and cried out, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this new mystery? How is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen forefather!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The choir of Thy martyrs was shown to be adorned with the divine gifts of the apostles and prophets, O Master, being, through Thy providence, of their very number.

Assembled from divers walks of life, like a perfect model of the Church, ye were vouchsafed to save those who cry out together: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Guided by the hand of the Master, Who of His own will endured death for their sake, the all-lauded assembly of martyrs cried out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Taught of thee by divine words, O Theotokos, and beholding their fulfillment, delivered by thy birthgiving, we cry out to thee: ­Rejoice, O most immaculate Virgin!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Unable to bear serving those on earth, O Pamphilus, by suffering thou didst adorn the divine life which thou hadst led from thy childhood.

Adorned with godly gray hairs and wisdom, Valens hastened to the Holy City and hath been crowned as a martyr.

Possessed of the mind of Christ, as the namesake of Paul wast thou adorned with the crown of martyrdom, having suffered lawfully, O all-lauded one.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst set aright the stumbling of Eve, O pure Theotokos, having given birth to God the Word, Who hath set aright the fall of those who have been cast down.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Made steadfast by the hope of life eternal, rejoicing, the valiant ones, who shared the names of Thy divine prophets, endured the dismemberment of their bodies, O Savior.

By their death Samuel and Elijah, Daniel and the divine Jeremiah, and with them Isaiah of great renown, purchased a higher life.

Egypt, which of old was covered with the profound darkness of ignorance, now shineth forth radiant beacons unto God, enriched by the light of the knowledge of God.

*Theotokion:* Daniel beheld thee, O most immaculate one, as the mountain from which was cut the Stone Who hath crushed all manner of falsehood, filling all the ends of the earth with divine knowledge.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Rejoicing in wisdom made manifest by heaven when dreadful torments lay before them, the valiant athletes conversed amongst themselves, sparing not their flesh. Wherefore, they have inherited everlasting glory, ever praying for us who praise their contest.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Looking to thy coming joy with radiant countenance and purity of mind, O most blessed martyr Porphyrius, mercilessly lacerated thou didst disdain thy torments.

God Who saved the three youths in the furnace manifestly accepted thee as a sacrifice of sweet savor when thou wast burned alive in the fire for His sake, O blessed athlete Porphyrius.

Adorned with the strength of thy soul and body, O most lauded Seleucius, thou didst cast down all the might of the tyrant, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O my God and Lord!

*Theotokion:* As Theotokos, thou gavest birth to Him Who is more comely than all creation, for thou wast truly the most holy abode of God. Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Making thyself subject to the laws of the Christians, O most wise Seleucius, thou didst reject all else. And thou wast a soldier and teacher of piety, taking care of orphans and widows, and crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Shining with noetic radiance, O glorious elder, martyr Theodulus, thou wast a true servant, emulating the Master. And, desiring His Cross, rejoicing, thou didst endure crucifixion, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having shown thyself to be a temple of the divine Spirit, O Julian, with goodly demeanor wast thou adorned. And, full of reverence and splendor, full likewise of faith, thou wast wholly consumed by fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* The Word Who in the beginning was begotten of the Father without mother, was born of thee without father in later times, O most pure one. The Incorporeal One became incarnate, desiring, in His loving-kindness, to save those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Desiring to possess the life of heaven alone, O athletes, with great wisdom ye spurned that which is transitory and corrupt; and now ye enjoy a higher and blessed sweetness.

Standing before the wellspring of effulgence, O glorious martyrs, ye now dance with zeal amid the paradise of God; and drawing forth drink therefrom, ye are illumined with its splendors.

O choir of twelve, mindful now of all who keep your all-radiant memory with faith, entreat Christ the Master, that we may be counted worthy to dwell with you.

*Theotokion:* As Mother of the only Master, O Virgin Mary, thou hast surpassed all other creatures. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, rejoicing, now magnify thee in gladness, O most immaculate one.

