Also on The 20th Day of the Month of February

Commemoration of the Venerable Hieromartyr Cornelius, Abbot of the Monastery of the Caves of Pskov

At Great Vespers

After the introductory psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 in Tone VI—

Praising the struggles of the wise ascetic, the pangs of the warrior of Christ, as is meet, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto the Lord: By his supplications, O Christ God, deliver us from every misfortune! *Twice*

O Cornelius, thou shield of Orthodoxy and guide of monks, model of humility, path of industriousness, who dispersed the darkness of ungodliness from among the people, thou wast filled with the heavenly Spirit, and like the Forerunner wast beheaded: as thou now standest before the throne of the King of glory, pray thou for us who honor thy memory.

And 3 stichera in Tone V—

Rejoice, O blessed Cornelius, great boast of the faithful, adornment of those who love Christ, glory and ornament of the Monastery of the Caves, tireless guardian of Orthodoxy, who planted churches of God as a garden for Christ, who with vigilance keep good watch over thy flock! And now, as thou standest before the throne of the King of glory, ask for us great mercy. *Twice*

Rejoice, O warrior of Christ, all-glorious leader of ascetics, meek instructor of monks, wellspring of loving-kindness, teacher of poverty, who led the heathen unto Christ! Having gloriously finished the earthly race, slain unjustly by the Tsar, and been crowned with the martyrs, O Cornelius, with them beseech Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O venerable father Cornelius, thou hast rightly taught us how to walk in godliness. Thou wast a lover of poverty, providing all with a model of industry; and composing hymnody to the Mother of God, thou hast revealed to us her wondrous icons. And, bowing down before them, we now say: O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, show forth upon us thy rich mercies through the supplications of thy venerable hieromartyr.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and this sticheron of the venerable hieromartyr, in Tone VI—

O all-praised Cornelius, all thy life didst thou offer up as care for the virtues, for with hymnody the faithful praise Christ with faith, submitting to thy teachings. Standing before the divine Spirit, pray thou that we be made steadfast in peace.

Glory…, in Tone VII—

Come, let us rejoice in the honored temple of the Mother of God, O ye people, and let us hasten to Cornelius, her favored one, who hath shone forth upon us in spiritual struggles, poverty of spirit and patience: the comforter of the poor and sorrowful, the healer of the sick who exacteth no fee, the teacher and enlightener of the heathen, the emulator of Christ the Savior. For, having entered into the Holy of holies with blood, the venerable one was crowned with the martyrs, and now entreateth the Savior in our behalf, that we be delivered from grievous circumstances and counted worthy of His kingdom on high.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Having recourse unto thy protection, O Mistress, all of us born of earth cry aloud to thee: O Theotokos, our hope, deliver us from our countless transgressions, and save thou our souls.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

As a dwelling-place of the virtues, an apostle and martyr, who forsook the house of thy father from thy youth, thou becamest the wise abbot of the abode of the all-pure Virgin.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Thou didst erect houses to the Mother of God and the saints in towns and villages, O father, and dost now rejoice with them in their habitations in heaven.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

The disposition and adornment of the house of the Mother of God founded by God in the land of Pskov and embellished by the hands of the saints, ever enjoyed the good pleasure of the all-pure one and the labors of the blessed Cornelius.

Glory, in the same tone—

As a lamb led before the shearers openeth not its mouth, so didst thou remain silent before the wrath of the Tsar; and, confounded by thy meekness, he struck thee dead with his sword. O the wickedness of unbridled rage! O the temerity which striketh down even the defenseless servants of Christ! Yet in slaying thee for thy very virtue, the dread sovereign won for thee a place among the martyrs before the throne of God, where thou offerest fervent intercession in behalf of all who honor thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Virgin Mother of the Lord, standing before God with the sanctified Cornelius, pray for us sinners, that we obtain salvation for our souls.

Troparion, in Tone VI—

The Monastery of the Caves of Pskov, famous from of old for miracles of the icon of the Mother of God, hath trained many monks for God. There also the venerable Cornelius fought the good fight, glorifying the wondrous Mother of God, enlightening the heathen, and saving monks and many of the people, marvelously adorning and fortifying his habitation. And there also he bravely received the crown of martyrdom after many years as pastor. Wherefore, O ye people, let us hymn Christ God and give thanks unto His all-pure Mother, for He hath given us the glorious hieromartyr as a right blessed advocate for our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Gideon foretold thy conception, and David proclaimed thy birthgiving, O Theotokos; for as the dew descended upon the fleece, so did the Word descend into thy womb, and thou, O holy ground, without seed didst put forth Christ our God, the salvation of the world, O thou who art full of grace.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the hieromartyr, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

Clad in the angelic habit, arrayed in the priesthood and adorned with martyrdom, O venerable Cornelius, thou didst add to the choirs of the angels. And thou grantest healing of soul and body to those who with unwavering faith have recourse unto thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Lift up the horn of Christians and cast down the arrogance of the ungodly, O Theotokos, saving this thy flock, wherein thy great and much-hymned name is ever magnified and glorified.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Having labored in ascetic struggle from thy youth, that thou mightest gain riches in the heavens, thou didst enlighten those in the darkness of polytheism and lead them to the true light of Christ. Wherefore, O blessed father Cornelius, for thy virtue thou wast vouchsafed the splendid crown of martyrdom and a dwelling-place among the mansions of the saints of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O true Theotokos, who alone ineffably gavest birth unto Christ the Savior: with thine earnest intercession, and by the prayers of the sacred martyr Cornelius, move thy Son and God to have mercy upon our wretched souls.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable hieromartyr Cornelius, and we honor thy holy memory, thou instructor of monastics and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm Verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn in Tone IV—

Emulating the Forerunner of old, thou didst dedicate thyself to the struggles of fasting and prayer, mortifying the members of thy flesh with abstinence and ascetic feats; and like him thou wast unjustly slain by an iniquitous king because of thy righteousness and virtue. Wherefore, O venerable martyr Cornelius, beseech the Lord and Master of all, that He deliver us from all tribulation and oppression, grant remission of all our transgressions, and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Far beyond our comprehension are thy grace and beauty, O all-immaculate Virgin. Yet deign thou to accept homage from us, thy lowly servants, though we offer it with lips which are sullied and defiled; and reject not us sinners, for we have none other hope or help than thee, O Queen and Mistress of creation.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 37

\[Mt. 10: 23-31\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “When they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household? Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. And fear not those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O father Cornelius, and thou wast a teacher of the heathen and a good instructor of monks; and having shed thy blood, thou standest before Christ. Him do thou unceasingly beseech, that our souls be saved.

Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable hieromartyr, with 8 troparia, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

O Lord, pour forth the water of compunction upon my heart, and illumine my mind, that I may worthily hymn Thy favored one, the venerable Cornelius.

Thou wast an instructor and impartial teacher of monks, O blessed one, and leading them to God, wast crowned by an earthly king with the crown of martyrdom.

Illumined with the effulgence of Christ, O venerable father Cornelius, by thy supplications illumine my benighted soul, that I may hymn thee, O all-blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, thou art a calm harbor for those who perish in a sea of sins; wherefore, turn not away those who have recourse unto thee, O Ever-virgin, but save us by thine intercession as Mother of God.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

With the light of the true Faith thou didst enlighten those who worshipped idols. And with the grace of the All-good One Who loveth mankind enlighten also us sinners, who flee to thine aid.

While thou didst pray that blessings of body and soul be granted to all, thy body was slain by the treachery of the evil ones, yet thy spirit hath made its abode with the saints; and thou prayest now to Christ in our behalf, O venerable one.

Having now passed from the earth into never-ending glory, O venerable one, with the zealous cleansing of thy prayer heal thou my soul, which hath been cursed with the passions.

*Theotokion:* In thy temple, as on a ship steered by thee, O Theotokos, we are now delivered from enemies visible and invisible, and are strengthened by thy help, O Ever-virgin.

Kontakion, in Tone II—

Having given thyself over to labors and struggles from childhood, O wondrous Cornelius, thou wast made abbot of the Monastery of the Caves of Pskov, and as a model of faith and the ascetic life for all, thou didst lead many unto God. And persecuted by the wicked out of hatred for thy great virtues, in martyrdom thou didst surrender thy soul unto God. Wherefore, we cry aloud with faith: O right glorious venerable martyr Cornelius, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III—

Even the angels in heaven were filled with awe, beholding thee ascend to the summit of the virtues by thine ascetic labors, the grace of God assisting thee; and they marvelled all the more to see the Lord of heaven bestow upon thee a wreath of victory for running well the course of life and attaining its end in the victory of martyrdom.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Though thou abidest forever at the side of thy Son, arrayed in the robes and crown of the Queen of heaven, O all-pure Mother of God Most High, yet dost thou ever look down upon sinful mankind, helping and assisting them amid their sorrows and griefs, and pouring forth healings and miracles upon them through thy holy icons, that, in fulfillment of thy words, all generations may ever call thee blessed.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

From of old there was a community of the saints in the cave wrought by God, known unto God alone; and emulating them and venerating the place of their struggles, O father Cornelius, thou didst lead a multitude of monks unto God.

O venerable Cornelius, forsake not this monastery which was restored by thy sweat and labors, but preserve it, for even the enemy hath beheld thee protecting and strengthening it.

Thou ever healest the most painful sufferings of those who have recourse unto thee, O venerable one; for thou receivest grace from the Lord to work signs and wonders.

*Theotokion:* Still thou the raging storm of unbelief and cruelty, O Mother of God, and the grievous sufferings which threaten to devour those who glorify thee and venerate thine image; and help us, through the prayers of thy venerable one.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

O venerable one, thou didst steadfastly protect thy monastery from evil besiegers, as it were a precious stone, rescuing and freeing the monks from the passions and leading them upwards through the virtues.

Let the true strugglers of piety in thy monastery never lack thy supplications, O father, but with the holy wonder-worker Nicholas, to whom thou didst entrust its protection, preserve it until the trumpet of the archangel will sound.

O venerable father, help thy monastery, its inhabitants and all of us, to set at nought all the machinations of the evil one, as thou once didst fend off enemies visible and invisible.

*Theotokion:* Dispel the gloom of our passions, O Virgin, and with the gracious power of thy Son drive away the treachery of the enemy and the assaults of the devil from thy servants who glorify thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst protect and adorn the house of the all-pure one, O venerable one; wherefore, as is meet, in heaven thou now makest thine abode in her habitation, and on earth in her temple.

Comfort and grant peace unto us who are orphans and poor in virtue, O venerable martyr, driving away the pride of life and teaching us true prayer.

Having made thy soul a temple of the Holy Spirit, O all-glorious one, thou becamest an heir of the kingdom of heaven. With the hosts on high and all the saints pray to the Lord for the salvation of our souls.

*Theotokion:* Preserve thy house until the end of time, O Theotokos, and leave us not orphaned, bereft of thy maternal aid and the intercession of thy venerable ones.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

Thou wast a radiant lamp of Orthodoxy and the twofold defense of the land of Pskov, O father, uprooting polytheism and guiding the people to God. By thee was the house of the Mother of God strengthened and made glorious; and, adorned with the virtues, thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom. O venerable martyr Cornelius, be thou mindful of us, thy children, as thou prayest to the Lord.

*Ikos:* As an excellent abbot beloved of God, an apostle and martyr of the Faith of Christ, a feeder of the poor who wast generous to all, who didst lead the people away from their idols to the true God, guiding them to the Faith: building temples of God, thou didst assemble multitudes of monks in the monastery of the all-pure one; wherefore, the Mother of God hath glorified her icons with wondrous works, a true witness to which thou wast. And thou dost now deliver us from grievous circumstances, that we may chant unto thee with faith and love: Rejoice, O venerable martyr Cornelius!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst receive martyrdom like Jonah of old, who once fled from tyrants, O glorious one; wherefore, pray thou to God with him, that He preserve thy monastery unharmed and draw us unto thee through repentance.

Like Melchizedek, Mark, the secret desert-dweller, in his own name chastised thee with infirmity, O Cornelius. Teach us to emulate his humility, O blessed one.

Having enlightened thy heart, O venerable one, thou becamest a guide of monks, instructing and teaching them, and leading all to the will of God, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, let the lying and deceiving mouths be stopped of those who acknowledge not thy protection of the faithful; and save those who truly serve thee, O Virgin, and who bear well the easy burden of Christ.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Thou dost admonish those who lived in thy fold, O venerable one, manifestly appearing to them and instructing them in dreams; and thou dost miraculously help all who pray to thee, and deliverest them from evil tribulations.

Pray for us, O venerable one, and forget not those who have recourse unto thee, who find themselves amid sorrows and griefs, granting them comfort through thy healing shrine.

Thou didst flourish like the palm-tree of which David spake, O father, and wast shown to be a habitation of the all-holy Spirit. Pray thou unceasingly in behalf of us who with faith honor thine all-honored memory, O venerable Cornelius.

*Theotokion:* Time draweth to a close; love faileth; the evil one gaineth the victory. Who can help us if thou wilt not protect us with the Cross of thy Son, O wondrous Virgin Mother?

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou dost repose in the house of the Mother of God, as in Gethsemane, O blessed one, where, serving with compunction, thou didst humbly stand before the throne of God in the sacred cave.

There is none who departeth unconsoled from thy shrine, O venerable one, for to the faithful thou ever grantest healing of soul and body in abundance.

Thou beholdest the divine splendors of the angels and the beauties of the patriarchs, martyrs and apostles, O venerable one. With them entreat Him Who loveth mankind, that He grant remission of sins and correction of life unto us who praise thee.

*Theotokion:* Great peace was there in the cave for the saints who fled from the vanities of the world. O pure Virgin Mother, send down heavenly peace also upon us who magnify thee.

Exapostilarion—

Invested with the priesthood and greatly adorned with holiness, as is meet, and having made glorious the house of the Theotokos, thou didst lead the heathen to Christ. And when thy head was cut off by the sword, thy gray hairs were stained with blood, O Cornelius. And now, standing with the saints before Christ, pray that those who honor thy memory may finish this earthly course in peace and stand at the right hand of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

In falling asleep thou didst not forsake the world, O Theotokos; but in an earthly vale thou dost glorify thy holy name with miracles which flow from thy holy icon and the tomb of the venerable martyr. With him entreat thy son and God in behalf of us, the unworthy, who ever call thee blessed.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VI—

With sacred hymns and songs of jubilation let us praise and magnify the venerable hieromartyr Cornelius, the champion of the truth and enlightener of the benighted, the radiant beacon of Orthodoxy and impregnable rampart of the Church, the instructor of monastics and guardian of his sacred habitation: for he entreateth Christ our God to deliver us from all tribulation and misfortune. *Twice*

O ye faithful, let us lift up our voices in laudation, praising the venerable martyr Cornelius, the steadfast warrior of Christ, the guardian of the house of the all-pure Theotokos, the invincible victor in battle, who vanquished invisible foes and set at nought the siege of earthly armies: for as a fervent advocate and mediator he intercedeth for us at the throne of God.

Come, let us praise the venerable hieromartyr Cornelius, who loved Christ from his childhood and forsook all for His sake, who embraced the monastic life and struggled for the virtues of piety, and who received from the hand of the Lord the crown of martyrdom: for he entreateth Christ in our behalf, that He have mercy and save our souls.

Glory…, in the same tone—

What is this strange sight? The holy one went forth before the gates of the monastery to greet with honor the dread master, rendering unto an earthly king that which was meet; but the Tsar, overcome by a fit of rage, committed the good shepherd to an evil death; yet straightway he uttered lamentation, acknowledging his sin, and bore the body of the saint into the temple of the Mother of God, where it resteth to this day. O Cornelius, with the martyrs entreat Christ God in our behalf, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Thee do we beseech: Pray thou, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Romans, § 99 \[Rom. 8: 28-39\]

Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called according to his purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, them He also called: and whom He called, them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ Who died, yea rather, Who is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of God, Who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 67

\[Lk. 12: 32-40\]

The Lord said: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants. And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

