THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY
{{text_align=center}}

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND FINDINGS
{{text_align=center}}

OF THE PRECIOUS HEAD OF THE FORERUNNER
{{text_align=center}}

AT VESPERS
{{text_align=center}}

If it be not the Fast, we chant “Blessed is the man....,” the first antiphon; and on “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera. But if it be the Fast, we chant the usual kathisma, and sing the service to the Forerunner combined with that from the Triodion.

In Tone V—

Rejoice, O sacred and light-bearing head, venerated by the angels, which of old was severed by a sword and cut down the shame of impurity with sharp reproofs, wellspring of miracles which giveth drink unto the faithful, and which proclaimed the saving advent of the Savior and of old perceived the coming of the Spirit, which took up His abode in thee who didst stand between the grace of the Old and New Covenants. Entreat Christ God to grant our souls great mercy! *Twice*

The head of the Forerunner, which once was concealed in an earthen vessel, hath appeared, manifestly given up from the bosom of the earth and pouring forth streams of healing; for in the waters did he wash the head of Him Who even now covereth the chambers of the firmament with waters and raineth down divine remission upon men. Wherefore, let us bless it as truly most glorious, and in its discovery let us joyously keep festival, entreating Christ to grant our souls great mercy.

The head which proclaimed the Lamb of God Who hath appeared in the flesh, which with divine commands hath declared to all the ways of saving repentance, which of old denounced the iniquity of Herod and was therefore severed from its body and endured concealment for a time, hath shone forth upon us like a radiant sun, crying out: Repent ye, and in compunction of soul submit now to Christ Who granteth the world great mercy!

Glory..., in Tone VI—

The divinely preserved head, a treasury of divine gifts, O Forerunner, hath shone forth from the bosom of the earth; and we, faithfully receiving and bowing down before it, O glorious one, are enriched by thee with most glorious miracles and the forgiveness of our offenses, O Baptist of Christ!

Now and ever...: Theotokion:

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and, being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah
{{text_align=center}}

Thus saith the Lord: Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith the Lord. Speak, ye priests, to the heart of Jerusalem; comfort her, for her humiliation is accomplished, her sin is put away: for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double the amount of her sins. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight the paths of our God. O thou who bringest glad tidings to Sion, go up on the high mountain; lift up thy voice with strength, thou who bringest glad tidings to Jerusalem; lift it up, fear not. I, the Lord God, I will hear the poor of Israel and will not forsake them: but I will open rivers on the mountains, and fountains in the midst of plains: I will make the desert pools of water, and a thirsty land watercourses. Let the heaven rejoice from above, and let the clouds rain righteousness: let the earth bring forth, and blossom with mercy, and bring forth righteousness likewise. Utter aloud a voice of gladness, and let this be made known, proclaim it to the ends of the earth. Say ye: The Lord hath delivered His servant Jacob. And if they shall thirst, He shall lead them through the desert; He shall bring forth water to them out of the rock. Rejoice, thou barren woman who bearest not; break forth and cry, thou who dost not travail: for more are the children of the desolate than of her who hath a husband.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Malachi
{{text_align=center}}

Thus saith the Lord Almighty: Behold, I send forth My messenger, and he shall survey the way before Me: and the Lord, Whom ye seek, shall suddenly come into His temple, even the angel of the covenant, whom ye take pleasure in. Who will abide the day of his coming, or who will withstand at his appearing? For he is coming in as the fire of a furnace and as the herb of those who wash. He shall sit to melt and purify as it were silver, and as it were gold. And he will come to you as a Judge, and will be a swift witness against the wicked, and against the adulteresses, and against those who swear falsely by My name, and against those who keep back the hirelings’ wages, and those who oppress the widow, and afflict orphans, and wrest the judgment of the stranger, and fear not Me, saith the Lord Almighty. For I am the Lord your God, and I am not changed. But ye, the sons of Jacob, have perverted My statutes, and have not kept them. Wherefore, return to Me, and I will return to you, saith the Lord Almighty. And all nations shall call you blessed. Understand ye that I am the Lord Who discerneth between the righteous man and the iniquitous on the day whereon I shall preserve those who love Me. Be ye therefore aware and remember the law of Moses My servant, accordingly as I charged him with it in Horeb for all Israel, even the commandments and ordinances. And, behold, I will send to you Elijah the Tishbite, before the great and glorious day of the Lord cometh, who shall turn again the heart of the father to the son, and the heart of a man to his neighbor, lest I come and smite the earth grievously, saith the Lord Almighty, the holy God of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon
{{text_align=center}}

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. Thus the righteous who is dead shall condemn the ungodly who are living. For they shall see the end of the wise, and shall not understand what God in His counsel hath decreed of him. For the Lord shall cast the ungodly down headlong, that they shall be speechless, and He shall shake them from the foundation; and they shall be utterly laid waste, and be in sorrow; and their memorial shall perish. And when they cast up the account of their sins, they shall come with fear: and their own iniquities shall convict them to their face. Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his labors. When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation. And they, repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves: “This was he whom we held betimes in derision, and as a proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot among the saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. We have been full of the ways of the iniquitous and destruction, and have trodden trackless paths, but the ways of the Lord have we not known.”

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “When from the Tree....”—

Come, ye faithful, and let us honor today the precious head of the Baptist which was severed, greeting it with hymns on the day of its uncovering, and honoring it with love, for it poureth forth the grace of healings upon us. Of old Herod the adulterer cut it off, and it was wreathed about by the savagery of Herodias.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Like gold from the mine, so from the earth hath the head of the Forerunner shone forth, which hath appeared in an earthen vessel and doth plainly emit radiance to illumine our thoughts. And venerating it, O ye faithful, let us honor it today with hymns, for it doth entreat God in our behalf.

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

The head of the Forerunner, which of old was hidden in a vessel in the ground like a divine treasure, is today disclosed to the ends of the earth, pouring forth an abundance of streams of healing, curing sicknesses and enlightening souls. Wherefore, receiving the grace of all consolation, let us hymn it reverently with songs.

Glory..., in Tone II—

Like a most precious shrine of divine thoughts thy head, O all-praised John, hath shone forth today from the secret places of the earth, as from thy mother’s womb, clearly foreseeing the mystery of the ineffable Being; and it hath rendered the whole earth fragrant, emitting the myrrh of sanctification, noetically preaching the way of repentance and entreating the Savior of all in behalf of our souls.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

Christ the Lord, my Creator and Deliverer, Who came forth from thy womb, O all-pure one, and robed Himself in me, hath freed Adam from the curse. Wherefore, like the angel do we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most pure one, who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: Rejoice! Rejoice, O Mistress, thou intercession, protection and salvation for our souls!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

The head of the Forerunner, which hath shone forth from the earth, doth shed rays of incorruption and healing upon the faithful. On high it assembleth a multitude of angels, and below it calleth upon the human race with one voice to send up glory to Christ God.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

AT MATINS
{{text_align=center}}

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion, twice; Glory..., Now and ever..., the Resurrectional Theotokion, in the tone of the troparion of the saint.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before...”—

As a divine treasure hidden in the earth hath Christ disclosed thy head unto us, O prophet and Forerunner; wherefore, assembling on the feast of the discovery thereof, with divinely eloquent songs we all hymn the Savior Who saved our life through thine intercession. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

We hymn thee, O Bride of God, Mother of Christ God, glorifying thine unapproachable Offspring, by Whom we have been delivered from the deception of the devil and from all misfortune, O Mistress Theotokos; and we faithfully cry out: Have mercy on thy flock, O thou who alone art all-hymned!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up....”—

Freed from the impassable bosom of the earth like gold from a mine, thy sacred head hath most gloriously enriched all the thoughts of the faithful with knowledge divine, crying out: Repent! as is its wont. And bowing down before it, O Forerunner, we faithfully glorify Christ with loud voices. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

Never can we, thy servants, cease thankfully to hymn thy mercies with all our soul, O Mistress, crying out and saying: O all-holy Virgin, go thou before us and deliver us from enemies, visible and invisible, and from all threats; for thou art our help!

Polyeleos, and this Magnification—

We magnify thee, O John, thou baptizer of the Savior, and we all honor the severing of thy precious head.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. \[111: 1\]

B In His commandments shall he greatly delight. \[111: 1\]

A His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. \[111: 2\]

B And his righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[111: 3\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[111: 6\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[63: 11\]

B Lo, my lips I shall not restrain, O Lord. \[39: 10\]

A Thou hast understood My righteousness and My truth.

B And my tongue shall treat of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. \[Ps. 34: 28\]

A A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

B The generation of the upright shall be blessed. \[Ps. 111: 2\]

A With glory and honor hast Thou crowned him. \[Ps. 8: 6\]

B For Thou shalt bless the righteous, O Lord. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

A As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

B Whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us. \[Lk. 1: 78\]

A To give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. \[Lk 1: 79\]

B To guide our feet into the way of peace. \[Lk. 1: 79\]

Glory…, Now & Ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “That which was mystically commanded....”—

Like a pearl was the head of the Baptist concealed in the damp earth, and, adorned like a divinely radiant lamp, it illumineth the whole world, working wonders. For like the dawn hath the Forerunner put forth the sun most splendidly, preaching to us again with unwaning light, crying out: Behold, the Lamb of God! *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

We ever give thee thanks and magnify and bow down before thee, O pure Theotokos, hymning thy birthgiving and crying out unceasingly, O thou who art full of grace: Save us, O most merciful Virgin, in that thou art good, and at the hour of trial rescue us from the dread interrogation of the demons, that we, thy servants, not be put to shame.

Song of Ascents, the first Antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

There will I make to spring forth a horn for David, I have prepared a lamp for my Christ.

*Stichos:* Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.

“Let every breath praise the Lord!”

Gospel according to Luke, §31 \(7: 17-30
{{text_align=center}}

At that time, the rumor of Jesus went forth throughout all Judæa, and throughout all the region round about. And the disciples of John showed him of all these things. And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying: “Art thou He Who should come? or look we for another?” When the men were come unto Him, they said: “John Baptist hath sent us unto Thee, saying: Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?” And in that same hour He cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many who were blind He gave sight. Then Jesus answering said unto them: “Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in Me.” And when the messengers of John were departed, He began to speak unto the people concerning John: “What went ye out into the wilderness for to see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, those who are gorgeously appareled, and live delicately, are in kings’ courts. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet. This is he, of whom it is written: Behold, I send My messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. For I say unto you: Among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.” And all the people who heard Him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

The precious head of the Baptist of Christ, which of old preached repentance to all the faithful, denounced the impurity of the iniquitous Herod, and lay upon a charger, hath appeared out of the hidden places of the earth and lieth before those who have recourse unto it with faith, who touch it with fear and bow down before it with spiritual love. Granting remission of transgression, with forgiveness it bestoweth that which is needful and great mercy.

Canon to the Theotokos \(the Paraklisis\), with 6 troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the Forerunner, with 8 troparia, in Tone VI—

Ode I
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Come, ye faithful, and with spiritual songs let us glorify the Forerunner, the voice of the Word, weaving hymns with a right laudable tongue and an almighty spirit, though our lips are impure.

With peaceful tranquility is the Church of Christ calmed and with countless multitudes is it tended prosperously, giving utterance to its annual hymnody unto thee, O Forerunner.

Assembling, O ye faithful, let us all honor with hymns, as is meet, the God-bearing head of the Forerunner, which hath been given unto us by God as an inviolable treasure.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, who received the Creator, as He Himself did desire, incarnate of thy seedless womb past all understanding, thou hast truly been shown to be the Mistress of creation.

Katavasia: “I shall open my mouth....”

Ode III
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

A barren womb put thee forth as a divine shoot, a glorious attendant to the Bride which is the Church of the nations, betrothing her to Christ, the true God and Bridegroom.

O Forerunner John, the wretched adulteress could not stop thy divinely eloquent voice with the sword, for from earth thou dost reveal thy divine head to us.

The city of Jerusalem, desiring thee and radiantly celebrating, keepeth festival, having found thy head to be a hidden treasure and an inexhaustible wellspring of healings, O Forerunner.

*Theotokion:* The wonder of thy divine birthgiving transcendeth all the order of nature; for in manner beyond nature thou didst conceive God in thy womb and, having given birth, dost ever remain a Virgin.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “That which was mystically commanded....”—

Like a treasure laid up in a hiding place was the head of the Forerunner preserved; the voice of the Word was hidden in a cistern. But like a grain of wheat planted in the depths of the earth it blossomed forth, yielding the fruit of divine life. The discovery thereof do we all honor, glorifying Christ Who hath imparted to it the grace to pour forth healings. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

Mystically receiving in his mind what was commanded, the incorporeal one went with haste to stand in the house of Joseph, saying to her who knew not wedlock: He Who bowed down the heavens by His descent doth immutably abide wholly within thee! And beholding Him within thy womb taking on the form of a servant, I fear to cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, O Bride unwed!”

Ode IV
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Clearly thou wast the seal of the Old Covenant and the prophets, O thou who art most rich, and thou didst preach unto the ends of the earth; and thou hast been revealed as the adorner of the bridal chamber of the New Covenant, O Forerunner.

O Forerunner, rejoicing, thou didst by habit endure the covering of thy precious and glorious head with coarse rags, as with a robe of royal purple.

By thy divine instructions, O John, a poor man, fleeing and wandering about, doth show thy divine head to be an abundant treasure.

O Forerunner, pray thou ever that the city of Jerusalem which honoreth thee be illumined with the radiance of the divine Spirit, and that it rejoice with the incorporeal ones in thy divine memory.

*Theotokion:* Eating hath shown me to be a dead plant, O all-pure one, but the Tree of Life Who revealed Himself through thee, hath raised me up and made me an heir to the food of paradise.

Ode V
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

O Baptist, thou wast not a reed ever shaken by the trying winds of enmity, but wast an unshakable pillar for the people of God; for thou didst show thyself forth with the power of Elijah and the Spirit.

He who rejected the Godhead and belittled the glory of Christ Who was baptized of thee, and concealed thy divine grace, is rightly kept from the fold of God.

Thou hast opened up the portal of a bountiful and divine wellspring which poureth forth the waters of grace divine upon those who hymn thee with love, O glorious Forerunner, gladdening all with streams of healing.

*Theotokion:* Bearing the noetic beauty of thy soul thou didst become the Bride of God, sealed in thy virginity, O pure one, enlightening the world with the radiance of purity.

Ode VI
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Christ called thee a true prophet, and the most exalted of the prophets, the Baptist and Forerunner of Life; for thou didst behold Him Whom the Law and the prophets foretold.

The fountain of miracles, the treasury of grace, thy sacred head, O Baptist, Prophet and Forerunner, could not bear to be concealed, and, having revealed itself, it poured forth springs of healing.

The Christ-loving and right glorious city doth set before itself thy precious and divine head, O Forerunner, as most rich praise, a radiant adornment and a splendid shield.

*Theotokion:* Moses, great among the prophets, prefigured thee in the ark, the table, the candlestick and the jar, signifying the incarnation of the Most High which took place through thee, O Virgin Mother.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest....”—

O prophet of God and Forerunner of grace, having obtained thy head from the earth like a most sacred rose, we ever receive healings, for again, as of old, thou dost preach repentance in the world

*Ikos:* Thou wast more exalted than all men, O John, as the Lord Himself bore witness. Hence, I fear to offer thee hymns of praise; yet, impelled by love, I have made bold to begin a hymn. Wherefore, deem me not to be an unworthy helper, that I may crown thy holy head, O thou of threefold riches; for thou dost preach repentance to the world.

Ode VII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The Offspring of the Virgin called thee the greatest among those born of women, for thou didst live for Him on earth like an incorporeal being, an equal to the angels, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

From within the barren womb of thy mother, thou didst recognize Him Who had taken up His abode in the Virgin’s womb, O Forerunner; and, using the voice of thy mother, leaping, thou didst cry out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Out of the wilderness thou didst appear like a radiant dawn, an angel of light, taught by the all-holy Spirit, teaching us to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having acquired thee as a treasure, O ever-memorable one, this city is now truly blessed among all cities, O Forerunner of Christ. Wherefore, keeping festival it crieth out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O Virgin Mother, a radiant Light hath shone forth upon the whole world, for thou didst give birth unto God, the Creator of all. Him do thou beseech, O all-pure one, that He send down great mercy upon us, the faithful.

Ode VIII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

The Forerunner was sent as the voice of the Son of God, crying out to barren hearts, making steadfast pious faith in Him Who is God, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages!

Even now the Forerunner saith: Prepare ye the way of the Lord! For, having come for the sake of our sanctification, He maketh His abode in our hearts forever with the Father and the Spirit.

When the voice of the Father was heard and the divine Spirit was seen by human eyes, John the Forerunner, laying his hand upon Thee, O Christ, became a God-bearer in all ways.

Thou wast sanctified from the womb by the Spirit of God, and wast shown to be a prophet while yet borne in the womb; and now, thou art shown as delight for the city that seeketh thee in the bosom of the earth, O prophet.

*Theotokion:* The golden candlestick prefigured thee who hast received ineffably the unapproachable Light which illumineth all with the knowledge of Himself. Him do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Ode IX
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Being manifestly a mighty proponent of the fulfillment of the ten commandments, O Forerunner, thou wast rightly honored by Christ with ten-fold gifts. Wherefore, knowing thee to be a friend of the Word, we bless thee as an initiate of the mysteries of the Spirit.

Prophet of Christ and Apostle, Angel and Forerunner, Baptizer of the Incarnation of God, priest and faithful martyr, preacher to those who were in hades, rule for virgins and offspring of the desert wast thou.

Unbelief of soul is reproved by the miracle of the withered hand of the priest; for when his faith blossomed anew and thy head appeared, O blessed one, his outstretched hand was restored.

The ranks of angels have truly proclaimed thy prophetic appearance to the beholder, emulating the divine announcement of Gabriel which the sacred Zachariah received before thy birth.

*Theotokion:* Let us draw forth the healing of our passions, making haste to the glorious temple of the Forerunner; for choirs of angels, the souls of all the righteous, the Mistress Theotokos and John the Baptist enter therein, bestowing healings.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “To the disciples....”—

Thy precious and luminous head hath shone forth from the impassable bosom of the earth, O Forerunner John, beacon of immaterial light; and, lovingly celebrating the discovery thereof, we entreat thee to obtain the remission of our grievous deeds, that we may complete the period of abstinence well, through thy prayers, O all-praised Baptist of the Savior. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

The divinely wise assembly of the faithful, which doth minister and faithfully hymn thee truly as the Theotokos, is comforted, O all-pure one. Wherefore, grant that by thy prayers we may splendidly finish the course of the fast, and may bow down before the precious Cross and the saving sufferings of thy Son and God.

At the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign....”—

Thy most precious head hath opened the outer gates of abstinence, O all-praised one, and hath set the most sweet substance of divine gifts before all. Partaking thereof with faith, we sweeten the bitterness of fasting, and praise thee with faith, and cry out to Christ God: O Jesus Almighty, Thou art the Savior of our souls! *Twice*

The head of the Forerunner which exudeth an ever-flowing stream of myrrh like water, set today upon a mystical and divine table, noetically perfumeth and dispelleth the bitterness of sorrows, and filleth with gladness all who cry out with love: O Jesus Almighty, Thou art the Savior of our souls!

Like a sword most sharp hath thy head severed the heads of the iniquitous foe, and hath poured forth healings and divine gifts upon all who reverence the Law. Wherefore, we faithfully praise thee, the friend and Forerunner of the Creator, O John, and earnestly do we cry out to Him: O Jesus Almighty, Thou art the Savior of our souls!

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Faithfully receiving with a voice of praise the most precious head of Thy Baptist, O Lord, which today was revealed from the earth, we, Thy sinful servants, led to prayer, pray that on the day of judgment we may, for his sake, obtain cleansing and great mercy from Thee.

Now and ever...: Theotokion—

O right loving God and Savior, from all evil circumstances save Thy servants, by the prayers of Thy Forerunner, and of all the saints, and through the entreaties of Thy Mother.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY
{{text_align=center}}

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 each from Odes III and VI of the canon to the Forerunner.

Prokimenon, in Tone VI—

The righteous man shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §176 \[II Cor. 4: 6-15\]
{{text_align=center}}

Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we who live are always delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We, having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.

*Stichos:* Truth is sprung up out of the earth, and righteousness hath looked down from Heaven.

Gospel according to Matthew, §40 \[11: 2-15\]
{{text_align=center}}

At that time, when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, and said unto Him: “Art thou He Who should come, or do we look for another?” Jesus answered and said unto them: “Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in Me.” And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John: “What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. For this is he, of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee. Verily I say unto you: Among those who are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, who was for to come. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

