THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY

THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS PORPHYRIUS, ARCHBISHOP OF GAZA

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...”, 3 stichera in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder...”—

O venerable father Porphyrius, taking the Cross of Christ upon thy shoulder thou didst abandon all and didst attain unto the desert, and armed with fasting and prayers didst do battle with the prince of this world. Wherefore, as a temple of the Spirit of God, thou didst cast him down together with carnal mindedness.

As of old God saved the three youths from the fire by His Angel, so now by thee hath He saved three youths who had been dragged down into a pit; for when they were borne as in a basket He overshadowed them with the light of a cloud which formed three crosses on their bodies unto the reproof of those who opposed thee, O Porphyrius.

Who can hymn thy temptations and pangs, thy misfortunes and tribulations, thy struggles for the faith as is meet, O Porphyrius? For thou didst show the boldness which thou hast before God to be great. Wherefore, we entreat thee, for thou hast such boldness: Pray thou in our behalf to the Lord, that we be saved!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

The preëternal God, taking flesh of thy blood, hath shown thee forth, O pure one, as an intercessor for men. Wherefore, deliver thy servants from all misfortune and every evil circumstance, and vouchsafe that all who glorify and bow down before thee may be accounted worthy of the splendor of the elect.

Or this Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross and voluntarily accepting suffering, O Jesus, Thy Virgin Mother, cried aloud, O Master: “Woe is me, my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost endure wounds unjustly inflicted, O Physician Who healeth human infirmities, and hast delivered all from corruption in Thy loving-kindness?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence; wherefore, thou hast won the heights by humility and riches by poverty. O father Porphyrius, entreat Christ that our souls be saved!

At Matins

The canon to the holy hierarch, the composition of George, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

The Church, adorned today with thy teachings as with royal purple, O Porphyrius, is made splendid thereby, and hymneth the Lord of all.

Having shone forth in divine discourses during thy life, thou hast been shown to be a beacon for all men, ever illumining them with thy deeds and teachings, and enlightening the ends of the earth.

Cleansed by the sprinkling of the Holy Spirit and arrayed in a garment of divine virtues, O Porphyrius, thou didst enter into hallowed places to minister as a priest unto Him Who anointed thee.

*Theotokion:* The Son of God, wishing to speak to those who are on earth of His ineffable love for mankind, which passeth understanding, O Bride of God, was born of thee in the flesh, granting regeneration unto the faithful.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Beneath thy feet didst thou lay low the arrogance of the godless who spake against the God of all Himself.

With the fire of thy words didst thou wisely consume the kindling of Manes, and to the faithful didst thou extend the enlightenment of thy doctrine.

Setting the feet of the faithful firmly upon a steadfast rock, O Porphyrius, thou didst shake the foundation of the godless from its very footing.

*Theotokion:* All the earth is full of the true knowledge and ineffable glory of thy Son and God, O pure one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith...”—

Thou didst shine forth in thy deeds like the morning star and didst drive all heresy from the Church, O holy hierarch Porphyrius; and thou didst enlighten the hearts of the faithful, that they might hymn and glorify the Lord. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory today, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved!

Glory..., Now and ever...: Theotokion—

He Who alone is Lord, without separating from His divine nature, yet taking flesh in thy womb, remained God though He became a man, preserving thee after thy birthgiving an immaculate Mother and Virgin as thou wast before giving birth. Him do thou entreat, that we be accorded great mercy!

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished Ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, lamenting maternally cried out: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou dost suffer Who art to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having within thy soul the Sun of righteousness and the most radiant splendor of the Faith, O Porphyrius, thou didst illumine all the fullness of the Church with thy discourses.

Made steadfast in the love of God the Word, O Porphyrius, thou didst disdain all the allurement of visible things. Wherefore, we honor thee as an equal to the angels and an honorable and holy hierarch.

As thou didst partake of the ineffable Mysteries, O Porphyrius, thou didst preserve them by thy pure actions in a pure and ineffable manner, as a worthy initiate of the mysteries.

*Theotokion:* Gloriously is the Church adorned with thy divine magnificence, O pure one; and, manifestly embellished thereby, it doth glorifieth thee with love, hymning thy birthgiving.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With thy words of truth thou didst break the chains of the rhetors, O Porphyrius, establishing the dominion of faith in all ways.

Having drawn forth the Comforter on earth, O venerable one, thou didst pour forth bountiful rivers of the teachings of piety, O Porphyrius.

Having dried up the torrents of ungodliness with the fire of thy words, O Porphyrius, thou didst enlighten men with the proclamation of piety.

*Theotokion:* Strengthened by thee, O all-pure one, with the power of the Spirit we vanquish the adverse foes of the truth of Christ.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

O Porphyrius, we all truly have thee as a spiritually animate image of the virtues ever shining forth unto divine deeds; wherefore, we honor thee.

Robed in the power of the Comforter as are those who behold the Word face to face, thou hast been shown to be invincible to the foe, driving away and cutting down their impiety.

Renewing men by the water of baptism and adoption, thou didst lead them forth as children of the Creator, and didst present them pure and immaculate, O Porphyrius.

*Theotokion:* Mindful of thy divine mysteries and ineffable glory, which transcend recounting, we who boast in thee, O all-pure one, unceasingly glorify thee as the true Theotokos.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest....”—

Adorned with thy most sacred ways, thou wast resplendent in the vesture of the priesthood, O all-blessed, divinely wise Porphyrius; and by thine exaltations thou dost spread beauty of healings, praying unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

The Church of Christ, assailed by contrary winds and assaults, O father, didst thou firmly establish with might; and it chanted unto Him: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

With valor didst thou triumph over the assemblies of heretics, O wise father, arrayed in the armor of the Word; and thou didst cry out to Christ in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Thou didst enter into the paradise of noetic virtues, where thou didst pluck beauteous flowers of truth, with which thou hast shed a sweet fragrance throughout the world, O father Porphyrius.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, the mighty Word of God, Who was born of thee, hath given thee as strength and dominion unto all the weak who cry out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With thy words didst thou arm and establish the Church of Christ, O wise one. Wherefore, it doth ever triumph over the assault of heresies and doth chant victoriously unto Christ, crying out: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Having thy mind continually on heaven, O Porphyrius, thou didst ineffably obtain a divine release unattainable by the senses; and beholding the mysteries of Christ with faith, thou didst cry out to Him: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

By thy prayers, O Porphyrius, thou didst stop the mouths of the noetic lions that were wickedly roaring forth blasphemies; and with the mighty darts of thy divine words thou didst crush their jaws, earnestly crying out to Him Who made thee strong: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* He Who sitteth upon the throne of the Father’s glory, His Son and Word, Who was born of thee in the flesh, O pure one, hath made thee a divine chariot and a most glorious throne, who alone art hymned by all mortals as their Mistress.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

As precious gifts thou didst bring to the munificent Master thy God-pleasing virtues, and those who have been delivered from heresy by thee, magnifying the Creator of all, O venerable father.

With the showers of thy tears thou didst quench the flame of the passions; thou didst serve the Creator with dispassion, and hast been vouchsafed greater glories, O Porphyrius, ever hymning and magnifying Him.

Joining chorus with the angels, saints and the venerable on high, O father Porphyrius, entreat the Lord and Benefactor in behalf of those who hymn and praise thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* The Master, Who for our salvation became a man, hath given thee, O pure one, as a mediator, protection and healing, unto all who glorify thee with faith and magnify Him with love.

