The 29th Day of the MONTH OF FEBRUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Cassian the Roman, the Confessor

When February hath 28 days, the service to Saint Cassian is chanted at Compline on the 28th; but if it be a leap-year:

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Thou didst wisely perceive transitory deception, O all-glorious one, and even after thy departure from hence unto the Lord thou hast hindered those who demand to have it, though it is in nowise abiding, and this fleeting and temporal life and social order. Wherefore, as a wise overseer, thou hast passed on to a better life, having pleased Christ, O Cassian, by thy life and works.

Taking up thy cross in childhood, O glorious father, thou readily didst tread the path which is hard and narrow, yet of surpassing honor, submitting to the commandments of Him Who called thee. Wherefore, for thy labors thou hast obtained as twofold recompense and fitting reward the heavenly kingdom of Christ and a place join chorus in the light with all the saints, O Cassian. With them do thou unceasingly pray in behalf of our souls.

A thing of wonder was every virtue, O divinely wise one, wherewith, at first on earth in the flesh, thou didst watchfully observe silence, O venerable one, and didst later bespeak in words and through material things, being humble, meek and innocent, a prophetic and right goodly herald. And now, when thou hast hastened to God, thou hast marvelled all the more, and hast received the grace of healing.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

Having stumbled because of mine evil disposition, and been enslaved to wicked deception, O Bride of God, wretch that I am, I flee to thine all-wondrous loving-kindness and thy fervent help, O all-holy Maiden. Deliver me from the bonds of temptations and grief, O all-immaculate one, and save me from the assaults of the demons, that I may glorify thee, may hymn and bow down before thee with love, and may magnify thee, O Mistress, as ever-blessed.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

As Symeon foretold, a sword pierced thy heart, O all-pure Mistress, when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee at the ineffable word of the archangel lifted up upon the Cross as one condemned by iniquitous men, given gall and vinegar to drink, His side pierced, His hands and feet transfixed by nails; and, lamenting, thou didst cry out, exclaiming maternally: “What is this new mystery, O my Child most sweet?”

AT COMPLINE OR MATINS

Canon, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Having crowned thy life with divine virtues, O venerable Cassian, thou didst depart unto God. Him do thou beseech, we pray, that deliverance from transgressions be granted us who commemorate thy holy repose with faith.

Wholly inclined toward the God of all, O right glorious one, thou didst turn away from passionate thoughts, and, deified by partaking of the immaterial, thou becamest light, hymning the all-glorious Lord Who glorified thee.

In thy divine teachings thou wast a physician for souls, O Cassian, and, setting aright the thoughts of monastics by grace, thou didst lead them to life everlasting. Wherefore, we all honor thee with love.

*Theotokion:* We all know thee, O pure one, as her who conceived in the womb; for in manner past understanding thou gavest birth to God Who had clothed Himself in mortal flesh, the all-glorious Lord Who hath illumined the company of the venerable. Gloriously hath He been glorified!

Ode III

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Christ hath shown thee to be the enlightenment of those in darkness, a star shining forth in the heights of the Church, O most lauded and venerable one, adornment of fasters.

Emulating Him Who took upon Himself the Cross and hath enlightened the world, O Cassian, thou didst crucify thyself to worldly pleasures, overcoming the wiles of the demons.

Thy heart was full of wisdom, O all-wise one, and through the Holy Spirit thou hast poured forth an abyss of teaching, which giveth drink to the flock of monks.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, by thy divine mediation heal thou my soul which is afflicted by the passions and all manner of assaults by most wicked demons, I pray.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

As one venerable, thou didst offer thyself to God; and, illumined by goodly visions, O Cassian, thou didst shine like the sun in the splendor of thy divine teachings, ever enlightening the hearts of all who honor thee. Earnestly entreat Christ in behalf of those who praise thee fervently with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As one who loveth sin, I beseech thee who gavest birth to our sinless God Who taketh away the sins of the world: O all-pure one, take pity on my greatly sinful soul and cleanse me of my manifold sins; for thou art the cleansing, salvation and aid of the faithful.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding Him Who was crucified upon the Tree of His own will, said, weeping and lamenting: “How hath the thankless assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, O my Son, Who delighted them with many and great gifts? Yet do I hymn Thy long-suffering, O my God!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

With thine ascetic struggles thou didst make the uprisings of thy flesh subject to thy spirit, O venerable one; and with thy sacred teachings thou didst lay bare every machination and pursuit of the deceiver.

Mortified of thine own will toward worldly mortality, thou hast received the inheritance of the life to come, O all-glorious Cassian; and thou hast written laws for the instruction and perfecting of monks.

The grace of the Spirit abode in thy soul, O thou who art most rich, and hath manifestly shown thee forth as above all carnal understandings and the snares of the deceiver.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, thou didst ineffably give birth to the Timeless One, Who entered time, hath illumined the venerable who live by faith, and hath laid low the serpent, the author of evil.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou art a Mediator between God and man, O Christ God; for by Thee, O Master, are we led up out of the night of ignorance to Thy Father, the Source of light.

By thy virtues, O God-pleaser, wast thou caught up, borne aloft; and, rejoicing, thou hast attained unto the mansions of heaven, receiving honors for thy labors as is meet.

Gazing upon the beauty of Christ with pure mind, thou didst stand immovable day and night, O all-glorious one, receiving divine revelations therefrom.

Watered with torrents of tears, O God-bearing father, like a tree with lofty branches thou didst produce the fruits of correction which divinely gladden the thoughts of all.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who, in manner past understanding, shone forth Life from thyself: thou hast slain the enemy who brought death to us all and hath enlivened the world, which hymneth thee without ceasing.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst tread the narrow path, O father, and by thy words hast shown it to all. And those who walk it well are led into the spaciousness of paradise.

Thy life was venerable and thine end blessed and honorable, O Cassian our father, thou converser with the holy angels.

Thou didst cast off slumber and, keeping vigil in visions and spiritual activities, didst live angelically on the earth, O most blessed God-bearer.

*Theotokion:* Loving thee, O most immaculate one, as one comely and beauteous, Jesus was born of thee in the flesh and deifieth me in His boundless loving-kindness.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Ever deified by most splendid visions, O divinely wise one, thou wast shown to be a beacon which is never dimmed; and therewith thou didst shine forth salvific discourse which illumineth the minds of all of us who praise thee.

Thy tongue, sharpened by the Spirit, manifestly inscribing the law of salvation, set forth models whereby all are corrected, O most blessed one, ever rejoicing the flock of monastics.

Salvific thoughts and words which dispel the ignorance of men’s hearts hast thou richly poured forth, O venerable and God-bearing father. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith, keeping thy most holy memory.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast a bridal-chamber of divine glory and a fiery throne, whereon the incarnate Word did rest in His utter goodness. Him do thou beseech, O pure one, to take pity and have mercy upon us.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Shining like a star in word and life, O Cassian, thou dost illumine all the ends of the earth, doing away with the darkness of ignorance and commanding all ever to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Dying, thou didst set like the sun, O all-blessed one; ye thou didst leave behind thine ever-undimmed discourses, which illumine the souls of us who with faith keep thy holy memory, O venerable one.

Thou dost ineffably delight in noetic beauty, having left behind thy corruptible body, and thou hast been vouchsafed to behold things upon which the armies of heaven gaze, O glorious one, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more spacious than the heavens, O Virgin, for they could not contain Him, yet thou didst ineffably hold Him and gavest birth in manner past understanding to Him Who, as God, is twofold in nature but one in hypostasis.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Might and power were given thee by God to drive away the princes of the prince of this world. Wherefore, having truly contended mightily, O divinely wise father, thou hast been numbered among the choirs of the venerable, rejoicing.

Like a rose of sweet fragrance the divinely inspired words of thy godly tongue perfume us; for thou wast the goodly fragrance of Him Who emptied Himself for our sake in His loving-kindness and clothed Himself in our flesh, O most honored God-bearer.

Thy memory, shining forth today in holiness, doth illumine the hearts of those who praise thine angelic life, O Cassian. Thereon do we make entreaty: pray thou that forgiveness of offenses be given to all.

*Theotokion:* We offer unto thee the voice of Gabriel, crying: Rejoice, O table who bore the divine Bread! Rejoice, O impassable gate! Rejoice, thou joy of all the saved and boast of the venerable, O Ever-virgin Theotokos!

