The 4th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of Our Venerable Fathers

Joseph the Hymnographer

& George of Mount Maleon, in the Peloponnese

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for Saint Joseph, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Thou didst take thy cross upon thy shoulder, and crucify thyself to the world, and didst follow in the steps of God the Word Who created all things out of nothingness, as He said, and didst shake off the love of the world and every passionate attachment. Wherefore, shining forth in the virtues, O father, through divine works thou didst receive an eternal inheritance.

Thou wast shown to be a mystic clarion rousing all to spiritual hymnody, and a harp sounded by God, praising the regiments of God, glorifying all the saints and proclaiming their victories. For thou didst draw forth an abyss of words from the springs of salvation, giving drink to the house of God.

Crucified with love, thou wast shown to be a treasury of the virtues, and, chanting sacred hymns, thou didst seek out all who were well-pleasing to God in their lives, emulating with faith their divine corrections; and sharing therein in godly manner, thou wast shown to be a partaker of sweetness.

And 3 stichera of Saint George, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

As a beauteous vessel of dispassion containing the radiance of life, O all-blessed father George, by abstinence thou didst enslave the passions to thy thought; and thou wast a destroyer of the demons and a healer of sufferings, O right wondrous one.

Let George now be praised, who was the pure phial of the divine Spirit, the well-spring of miracles, the pillar of monastics, the meek emulator of the meek Christ, the earthly angel and heavenly man.

Steering the ship of thy soul toward the calm harbor, thou didst escape the turmoil of life as from the waves of the sea, and didst soar aloft to God, away from the earth, and wast shown to be like an angel while yet in the flesh.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

In that thou art the help of helpless men, the hope of all the hopeless, and a release from cruel circumstances, O Theotokos, be thou my helper, O all-pure one, delivering me from sins and tribulations, in that thou art merciful.

Stavrotheotokion—

Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, and witnessing His long-suffering, O pure Mother, weeping, thou didst say: “Woe is me, O my most sweet Child! How is it that Thou endurest these things unjustly inflicted upon Thee, O Word of God, that Thou mayest save mankind?”

AT MATINS

Two canons for the saints, each with four troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Venerable Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

With hymnody let us honor Joseph the hymnographer, chanting his mellifluous hymns, for he hath passed over from hymns to everlasting ­hymnody.

As the preaching of the prophets and the apostles illumined the whole earth, so doth the chanting of thy mouth lift the world up to the glory of the God of all.

Having offered thyself to Christ from childhood, O Joseph, thou didst live in fasting; wherefore, He enriched thee with divine gifts, with hope, love and pure faith.

*Theotokion:* Of old, the divine words of the prophets proclaimed thee to be the portal of God and the holy mountain, O Virgin Theotokos, thou adornment of godly athletes.

Canon of the Venerable George, the acrostic whereof is: “Earnestly do I hymn thy pangs, O father”, in the same tone.

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing*

Illumined with the thrice-radiant effulgence which doth originate with God, O venerable father, thou didst forsake the world and the darkness of the passions, and didst adorn thyself with a most splendid life.

Guided by divine providence, O George, thou didst tread the path which leadeth to the heavens, acquiring the only most compassionate Benefactor as thy helper.

Manifestly directed by God and sanctified by the grace of adoptive sonship, O blessed father, thou didst perfect thy life in holiness and righteousness.

*Theotokion:* Enriched by thy confirmation and aid, O all-pure one, and confessing thee to be the Theotokos, we are saved from the threefold waves of life, O most immaculate Virgin.

Ode III

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* Establish us in Thee, O Lord Who hath slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

With love of purity thou didst entreat God to provide thee with helpers; and, receiving thy fathers without number, thou didst likewise receive thy hope, O father.

Showing forth a knowledge of true love, like Job thou didst open to all, like a door, the house, activity and wisdom given thee by God.

Seized by barbarian hands as of old the valiant Joseph was in Egypt, O thou who art most rich, with faith and purity thou didst preserve thy gift.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou hast been known to be a beautiful garden of paradise, having the Lord Jesus Christ within thee like a tree; wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Rejoicing, O most blessed one, without straying thou didst tread the path of life which abideth time without end, and thou hast made thine abode in the everlasting mansions.

Thy life was shown to be radiant and thy discourse seasoned in the Spirit with divine salt, O George, thou divine garden of the husbandry of God.

By baptism thou wast vouchsafed to become a son of God, O most blessed one, and thou hast inherited thy father’s treasure through purity of life.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, be thou the confirmation, refuge and protection of those who have recourse to thee with faith and profess thee to be the Mother of God.

Sessional hymn of Saint Joseph, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Thou didst show thyself to be meek, quiet and humble-minded, trembling at and fulfilling the divine words of thy Master, Who looked upon thee, O father, and caused thee to dwell in a mansion on high.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of Saint George, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

Thou didst desire Christ, the All-comely, and didst hate the carnal passions, O George, living angelically upon the earth. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy repose and venerate the shrine of thy relics, O father, from whence thou pourest forth healings upon us who honor thee with love.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As an uncultivated vine thou didst produce the most comely Cluster Who poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation which maketh glad the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the wine of the good, with the angel we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!

Or this stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee, dead, upon the Tree, O Christ, thy pure Mother who knew not wedlock said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous and thankless assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, O my Son, Who delighted them with thy manifold and great gifts? I hymn Thy divine condescension!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, report of Thy dispensation, and have glorified Thee, Who alone lovest mankind.

O venerable father, Christ hath shown thee to be the reasonable discernment and moderate rule of monks.

Thou didst show thy life to be a bridge of humility leading to the true life, O divinely wise one.

Anticipating, the Master blessed thee, O father, as one who provideth words as a measure of grain in due season.

*Theotokion:* Borne within the womb of the pure Virgin, Thou didst shine forth light upon those in the night and darkness of transgression, O Lord.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Fledged with the beauties of virtue and splendid moral qualities, O father George, thou didst take wing unto God.

Thou didst flee the tumult of transitory things, O father George, removing thyself to serenity by thy God-loving life.

Torrents of iniquity were unable to disturb thy soul, for torrents of sweetness gave thee drink.

Ever heeding the precepts of God, O all-wise father George, thou didst reject inconstant thoughts.

*Theotokion:* Hymning the One Who became incarnate in thy womb, we glorify thee as the Mother of God.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages, guide us in the light of Thy commandments; for we know none other God than Thee.

With faith didst thou hymn the saints who are on the earth, O venerable one; and thou dost now rejoice, listening to hymnody with them, unceasingly glorifying the Lord.

Leading all to repentance and confession, O wise one, thou didst describe for thyself their every cause, offering supplications to God, that thou mayest receive forgiveness.

Passing thy whole life in holy activities, thou wast like a true merchant, acquiring words and deeds for thyself like precious stones.

*Theotokion:* Deliver us from temptations and the tempest of evil thoughts, O pure Virgin, from all wrath, every sin, from starvation and destruction, and from everlasting torment.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Thou hast received blessedness and immortal life, O wise and most blessed father, making divine ascents, strengthened by hope, love and faith.

Adorned with goodly humility, O venerable and divinely wise one, thou didst manifestly mount to the summit of the virtues, becoming the granary of God’s husbandry.

Through abstinence didst thou with difficulty achieve the wasting away of thy body, O father, and didst acquire a pure heart; and thereby hast thou been vouchsafed to behold Him Who is invisible to all.

*Theotokion:* The mystery of thy divine birthgiving, which passeth understanding, is inaccessible and impenetrable to all, O Mistress; for thou truly gavest birth for us to God Who Is.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of thy loving-kindness: lead me up from corruption, O God!

The Church of Christ, resplendent with the varied multitude of thy hymns as with stars of the firmament, banisheth soul-destroying slumber.

The entreaty of thy words hath been like a sponge which wipeth away all grief for those afflicted in soul and body, O venerable one.

O venerable one, thou hast liberally bestowed twofold healing upon those who hunger for the word of salvation and are replete with bodily afflictions.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, lead me to the path of repentance who am squandering my life along the way and often stray into trackless paths through my sins.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Thou wast shown to be a zealous expeller of wicked spirits, O all-glorious father George, manifestly strengthened by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit.

Adorned with the gift of dispassion, thou hast clad thyself most splendidly in the robe of chastity, O George, dispelling the tumult of the passions.

Thou didst pass by the flaming sword, O wise George, and hast been vouchsafed the sweetness of paradise, armed with the invincible sword of the Cross.

*Theotokion:* Upon thee have I set my hope of salvation, O Ever-virgin Mother; and thee do I set as the steadfast and unshakable intercessor of my life.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Thou art an inexhaustible well-spring of repentance and an imparter of endless consolation and compunction, O Joseph. Grant us tears of divine repentance here, which shedding we may obtain consolation from God, asking thine aid, O holy one.

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* Of old, the young philosophers showed themselves to be orators, theologizing from their God-pleasing souls; and they chanted with their lips: O all-divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Even under the sleep of death thou hast striven not to have the eyes of thy soul shut; for thou chantest hymns with those who sing: O all-divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, having fervently blessed the choirs of the countless martyrs, O father, and dost chant with them unceasingly: O all-divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

For the healing of great sins, O all-wise father, thou hast appointed confession for those who chant thy hymns: O all-divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* As thou art the portal of Light, O Virgin Theotokos, with the pure effulgence of thy light, O Virgin Theotokos, guide my soul, which hath been grievously benighted by evil transgressions, that I may hymn thee.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the fire, bedewed they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Strengthening thy soul by the power of Christ, O father George, with His might thou didst drive from thyself the hordes of those who hated thee, terrifying them with the Cross wherewith thou wast protected; and thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Blessed art Thou, O all-blessed George, and good it is now for thee who receivest the reward of thy pangs and struggles and chantest to the Lord with the angels: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Thou wast a splendid habitation of Christ, O father George, being a throne of sense and wisdom, full of holiness, shining with faith and grace, and crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be a candlestand of the Light, a radiant cloud and a place of sanctity, O thou who knewest not wedlock, for thou didst ineffably receive the Word, the Holy of holies; and hymning Him we cry out to thee: Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable Joseph

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the fire into dew, hymn ye as Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly knowing this present life to be but a passing shadow, O wise one, thou didst strive to obtain that which is incorruptible; wherefore, thou didst found a multitude of honored monasteries for the salvation of men’s souls.

Possessing the uprightness of the meek and the spirit of one of the lowly, thou didst show forth all courage not only to render thyself steadfast, O father, but that all who beheld thee might serve the Creator.

Thine innocence and the outpouring of thy love were a model of Christ Who loveth mankind, O thrice-blessed one; and to Him didst thou unceasingly chant: Let us exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O the awesome mystery! O dread report! How the Virgin, by an ineffable union, giveth birth to the Word Who hath made Himself like unto us, yet remaineth forever pure as she was before giving birth!

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Thou didst pass over to invulnerable life, to never-fading sweetness, to everlasting glory and unwaning light, O father; for thou wast shown to be the work of God, Whom we exalt supremely forever.

Thou wast a servant of Christ, as a faithful minister and performer of His mysteries, a sure guide, O all-wise George, healing passions of soul and body.

Thou didst bring fruit full of asceticism to the store-house of Christ, O father; and with the wine-press of heaven, O all-blessed one, thou didst crush it like ripe grapes, and pourest forth the wine of compunction upon us on the day of thy commemoration.

*Theotokion:* O pure Theotokos, the Fruit of thy womb hath been for me the cause of life incorruptible and everlasting sweetness. Wherefore, in gladness I cry out to thee the cry of the Archangel: Rejoice, O Virgin!

Ode IX

Canon to St. Joseph

*Irmos* God the Word, Who from God came, in His ineffable wisdom, to restore Adam who had fallen grievously into corruption, and became incarnate ineffably for our sake of the holy Virgin, let us magnify, O ye faithful, in oneness of mind.

Inscribing images of the virtues upon thy pure soul as upon a tablet, thou didst actively offer them to all the saints, bringing twofold hymnody to each of the virtues, offering right-acceptable laudation by thy works.

The choirs of angels, the assembly of the apostles, the Theotokos and the Baptist, the company of prophets, the ranks of priests, the armies of martyrs and fasters, O Joseph, now crown thee with reciprocal praise.

Be thou ever mindful of thy reason-­endowed flock, and as when thou wast alive thou didst make intercession, O wise father, so grant thou life incorruptible, doing away with sufferings of body and soul by thy supplications to Christ.

*Theotokion:* Cease thou never to entreat thy Son, God Who loveth mankind, in our behalf, O Virgin; for thee have we acquired as our hope, and we who glorify thee with faith are delivered by thine aid from tribulations and sufferings, from transgressions and pain.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos: Same as the foregoing.*

Strengthened and firmly protected by faith and the power of Christ, O most blessed one, thou didst destroy the snares of the demons and, eluding all their wiles and their pursuit, thou standest, rejoicing, before the Master of all.

Offering all thy desire to God, O blessed father, and delighting in divine beauty which all nature desireth, thou didst adorn thyself with vision, activity and splendor of life; wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Cease not earnestly to entreat Christ in behalf of us who celebrate thy memory with faith, O all-blessed father, that we may be saved from perils and threefold billows, from tempest, tribulations and sufferings, and that He may grant peace unto the world.

*Theotokion:* O only most hymned one, thou gavest birth to the incarnate Word, Who before was incorporeal and Who is God of God, for the restoration and salvation of all mortals. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, magnify thee with hymns.

