The 8th Day of the Month of April

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles Herodion, Agabus, Asyncritus, Rufus, Phlegon, Hermes, and Those with Them

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Like wingèd eagles ye passed over all the earth, sowing precious doctrines, uprooting the tares of falsehood by grace, and producing much grain as fruit, O most lauded ones; and the noetic granaries hold it forever, laid up in abundance for the immortal Husbandman.

Let us bless Herodion, Agabus and Asyncritus, Rufus and the divine Phlegon, the branches of a fruitful vine who pour forth upon us the sweetness of salvation, which with divine faith maketh glad the thirsting hearts of those who celebrate their godly memory.

Higher than heaven in your thought, ye declared the glory of our God Who became incarnate of His own will, O ye apostles, beholders of God, instructors of the pious, foundations of the Churches, unshakable pillars, refuges of piety, servants of ineffable mysteries, leaders of our souls into light.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most pure one, who in thy womb contained the infinite God Who, in His love for mankind, became man, received our matter from thee, and manifestly deified it: disdain me not who am now sorrowful, but quickly take pity and free me from divers enemies and the malice of the evil one.

Stavrotheotokion—

As she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, the ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, marveled and cried out: “What is this vision which I see, O my Son most desired? How hath the iniquitous and unbelieving assembly recompensed Thee, which enjoyed Thy many miracles? Yet glory, O Master, to Thine ineffable condescension!”

AT MATINS

Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “Let us fashion a divine hymn for the apostles”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone III—

Ode I

*Irmos:* He Who of old gathered the waters into one at His divine behest, and parted the sea for the people of Israel, is our God and is most glorious. To Him let us chant, for He hath been glorified!

Together let us celebrate the most holy memory of the holy apostles, and let us hymn them with gladness of soul; for they entreat the all-holy Word to grant us cleansing and mercy.

Dispelling the putrefaction of the madness of polytheism with the salt of the divine Word, O glorious ones, ye rendered healthy all souls which fell prey to folly of old, and have presented them, saved, to the Creator of all. Wherefore, ye are glorified.

Let the glorious Herodion, Rufus and Phlegon, Agabus, Asyncritus and Hermes be blessed, the wise apostles and divine heralds who were close friends of our Deliverer.

*Theotokion:* O merciful Theotokos, boast of the apostles, glory of athletes and confirmation of the faithful: make steadfast my mind, which is troubled by the assaults of the deceiver and darkened by transgressions, I pray.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Most High, Thou Ruler of all, Who out of non-existence hast brought all things, which are fashioned by Thy Word and made perfect by the Spirit: Confirm me in Thy love!

In that ye are the eyes of the Church, open the eyes of many to see unimagined beauty, O godly disciples of the divine Word.

Thou wast shown to be a splendid habitation of the Trinity, O all-glorious Rufus, and with the word of grace didst cast down pagan temples and raise up churches to the Lord.

Renewing men’s hearts with thy divine discourse, O wise Rufus, and sowing therein the teachings of salvation, thou didst reap the salvation of the saved like most fruitful grain.

*Theotokion:* He Who is unapproachable in His divine essence hath now become accessible to me, O all-pure one, and hath united Himself wholly to man by taking on flesh in His utter compassion.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Having been taught by the Wellspring of wisdom, ye made wise those who before, through ignorance, madly worshipped graven images, O wise ones. Wherefore, ye are blessed for ages of ages, standing before the throne of the Holy Trinity. Earnestly pray, that we find remission of our transgressions, O all-glorious ones.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

I, the lowly one, flee to thy divine protection after God, O Theotokos, and, falling down, I pray: Have mercy, O all-pure Mistress, for my sins have gone over my head, and I tremble and am afraid of torments. Render supplication to thy Son, O pure one, that He deliver me therefrom.

Stavrotheotokion—

Seeing Thee, O Christ, Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, hanging upon the Cross, she who gave birth to Thee in the flesh in latter times cried out: “Woe is me, O beloved Jesus! How is it that Thou, Who art glorified as God by the angels, art now crucified by iniquitous men, O my Son? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering one!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou hast shown us constant love, O Lord, for Thou didst give Thine only-begotten Son over to death for us. Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Bringing divine healing to faithful nations, O wise ones, ye gave the wicked land of impiety over to destruction and founded souls firmly in the Faith. Wherefore, ye are blessed.

The city of Patras hath most manifestly been vested with power by thee, O blessed Herodion; for thou wast first to adorn its cathedra, illumined with the divine effulgence of the Holy Spirit.

In thee, its great citizen, O blessed Herodion, was the city of Patras truly made rich, for thou dost lead it to righteousness, to the Sion on high. Wherefore, it honoreth thee with divine hymnody.

*Theotokion:* At the archangel’s sacred words thou didst conceive the Word of the Father, Who delivereth men from all irrationality, O Virgin Theotokos. Wherefore, with divine words we ever glorify thee aloud.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast appeared on earth, O Invisible One, and of Thine own will hast dwelt with men, O Unapproachable One. And rising early unto Thee, we hymn Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Ye preached the Word Who came to earth to save the lost, O divine apostles, and have delivered all men from deception.

In strange manner hath the grace of prophecy been poured forth richly upon thee by God, O divinely wise Agabus; for thou didst manifestly proclaim what would come to pass.

Thou didst once appear prophesying to Paul his afflictions, bonds and tribulations, O prophet Agabus, when thou didst bind thy hands with his belt.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone didst have a strange childbirth upon earth, reconciling us with the only all-unoriginate Father. Wherefore, thee alone do we honor as the Mother of God.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of sins hath engulfed me, and my spirit doth perish. But, stretching forth Thine upraised arm, O Master, save me as Thou didst Peter, O Helmsman!

The Word set you forth as bright lamps illumining the whole world, dispelling the darkness and showing forth the path of salvation, O apostles who beheld God.

Preaching the mortality of the Immortal One, thou didst translate mortals over to life, O wise Asyncritus, thou boast of the apostles and firm bulwark of Hyrcanis.

Hyrcanis found thee to be a river full of water, O Asyncritus, and, irrigated by thy precious outpourings, it hath produced most comely plants for the Master.

*Theotokion:* The ark of the law prefigured thee who received the Fullness of the law of God and gavest birth to Him in the flesh, O Bride of God; and even after birthgiving thou didst remain as thou wast before giving birth, O Ever-virgin.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Ye were shown to be most honorable disciples and apostles of Christ, O glorious Herodion, Agabus and Rufus, Asyncritus, Phlegon and Hermes. Ever pray to the Lord, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto us who hymn you.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The three children would not bow down before the golden image, the object of the Persians’ worship, but chanted in the midst of the furnace: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Founded well upon the rock of Faith, O divinely eloquent ones, ye manifestly illumined the fullness of the gentiles who of old had vainly worshipped stones.

With the fire of thy divine words, O sacred Phlegon, thou didst utterly consume all the thorns of falsehood, and with the fervor of the Spirit thou didst manifestly kindle hearts which had wretchedly been quenched.

The inhabitants of Marathon, having thee as their great intercessor, excellent teacher, luminary and guide, honor thee unceasingly, O glorious Phlegon.

*Theotokion:* Having acquired the Tree of life, O pure one, thou didst become for us a new garden of paradise; and the fruit thereof hath given life to those slain by eating, O pure Theotokos.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace did not consume the children, nor did the fire of the Godhead harm the Virgin. Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry out with the children: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

Let Agabus, Phlegon and Asyncritus, Rufus, Herodion and the glorious Hermes, be blessed today, who were divine apostles of the Word, beacons for the world and teachers of the nations.

The all-glorious Hermes was the instructor and enlightenment of all Dalmatia; for he dawned upon it like a sun of great brilliance, working wonders and illumining hearts which before were blind.

Shining forth like a lamp bearing the word, O glorious Hermes, thou didst illumine those sitting in the night of evils; and, working healings and great signs, thou didst draw the fullness of the unbelievers to the Faith.

*Theotokion:* We, thy servants, O all-pure one, have thee as our intercession and an unashamed mediator before thy Son and God. Save us from misfortunes and grievous temptations, that with faith and love we may ever glorify thee.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Honoring her with hymns, let us magnify the Theotokos who was prefigured on Sinai to Moses the law-giver by the bush and the fire, who conceived the fire of God in her womb without being consumed, who is the most radiant and inextinguishable lamp.

With faith let us form a most sacred chorus, with unity of mind and soul fervently blessing Hermes and Herodion, Rufus and Agabus, the great Asyncritus and the divine Phlegon, who themselves beheld the Word.

Truly revealed as mystical olive-trees, the divinely eloquent ones have anointed our souls and faces with grace and delivered us from the oppression of the ungodly and the darkness of ignorance. Wherefore, they are called blessed as is meet.

O wise apostles of the Deliverer, ye have delivered us from much groaning and slavery to the enemy, the ancient cause of our fall; and with divine hope ye have shown us the ways which lead to the kingdom of heaven.

O six-branched candlestand of holy disciples, earnestly entreat the splendor of the threefold Sun, that He illumine souls of us who celebrate your most radiant memory, and deliver us from darkness and everlasting damnation.

*Theotokion:* Like flame-bearing tongs thou didst receive in thy womb the noetic Coal which consumeth our passions, illumineth our souls and dispelleth the darkness of the madness of idolatry, O pure and greatly hymned Virgin.

