The 9th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Eupsychius

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O ye martyrs of the Lord…”—

Though thy chest was lacerated until thine inner parts were exposed, O valiant martyr Eupsychius, thou didst remain unshaken, looking with thy noetic eye toward God Who strengthened thee and put the iniquitous to shame. Him do thou entreat, that those who honor thy memory with faith be saved today.

Thy divine head was cut off with a blow from a sword, O valiant martyr, and instead of blood thou didst miraculously pour forth milk and water, and didst draw the ignorant to understanding, receiving ineffable glory and granting great mercy to all by thy divine mediations.

With goodly courage Eupsychius ended his sufferings and struggles, vanquishing the mindless through patience, and amazing the unbelieving by undergoing unbearable pangs. Wherefore, after his end he hast found blessedness. Through his supplications, O Lord, grant great mercy to all.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

My thoughts are impure, my lips lying, and all mine acts defiled. What then shall I do? How can I meet the Judge? O Virgin Mistress, entreat thy Son, Creator and Lord, that He receive my spirit in repentance, for He alone is compassionate.

Stavrotheotokion—

“I cannot bear to see Thee asleep upon the Tree, Who givest watchfulness to all, that Thou mightest give divine and saving wakefulness to those who of old fell into the sleep of perdition through the fruit of disobedience!” weeping, the Virgin said, whom we magnify.

AT MATINS

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “With goodly courage I hymn the pangs of Eupsychius”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

With goodly courage I entreat thee, O blessed martyr Eupsychius, hymning thy sufferings. As thou hast boldness before the Lord, rescue my soul from the tyranny of the passions.

Yearning for God, thy mind disdained all the beautiful things of life, O blessed Eupsychius, and was shown to be wholly beautiful, achieving dominion over the passions.

Thou wast truly patient when thou wast subjected to torments and pangs, amazing all the ungodly; and thou art acknowledged to be a true athlete.

*Theotokion:* The Master Who was born of thee in the likeness of the flesh, O Maiden, hath restored our nature which had grown old and made mortals heavenly.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

The mindless ones reported thee, who art intelligent, to the impious prince who mindlessly worshipped demons.

When thou didst ascend to the summit of thy martyrdom, an angel appeared and made thee bold, O passion-bearer Eupsychius.

Thou didst chant while thou wast in prison, confessing God the Lord, and showing thyself to be a keeper of His commandments.

*Theotokion:* The choir of martyrs chanteth hymns to thee with thanksgiving, O pure Maiden, having triumphed through thy mediations.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Finishing thy good contest with goodly courage, thou didst vanquish the adverse foe, O martyr, receiving from God honors and miracles. Wherefore, the whole Church of the faithful calleth thee blessed, honoring thee with goodly praise on this present day.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

To the path of repentance guide us who have ever wandered away into the trackless wastes of evils and have angered the all-good Lord, O blessed Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place of God.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee stretched out, dead, upon the Cross, O Christ, the most immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the Spirit art without beginning, what is this, Thine ineffable dispensation, whereby Thou hast saved the creation of Thine all-pure hands, O Compassionate One?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Rejoicing, O martyr, thou didst distribute to the poor all that thou didst own, acquiring instead the riches of martyrdom which cannot be taken away and joy which waxeth not old.

Enlightened with sanctity, thou didst denounce the darkness of the unholy who sought to do thee violence and to lead thee astray with evil demonic deception.

Those inclined to falsehood were amazed by thee, who wast adorned with a truthful character and pourest forth words of life, O right wondrous one.

*Theotokion:* As thou art more exalted than the hosts of heaven, O Virgin, show my mind to be higher than the carnal passions.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst patiently endure the wounding of thy flesh, O blessed Eupsychius, when thou wast suspended aloft for thy zeal for the Master of all creation.

Thy sides lacerated and thy skin peeled away, with manly mind thou didst chant unto Christ, O martyr most patient.

When thou didst chant unto God, an angel appeared to thee, urging thee on to struggles; and, enabled by the Lord, thou didst accomplish them.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress of all, ever pray for those who set their hope on thee, that we may be delivered from the coming judgment.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

The burden of tortures came down upon thee like a storm, but could not drown thee, O martyr; for thou didst have Christ God as thy Helper and Helmsman, guiding thee to the calm harbor of His kingdom, O Eupsychius.

Showing forth the high eminence of thy soul to thine adversaries, O martyr, thou wast shown to be awesome to them, amazing their evil minds with thine endurance; and thou hast received a reward from Christ for the victory of thy struggles.

With the blood thou didst shed unjustly, thou didst drown the whole horde of the demons and didst overwhelm the multitude of the ungodly; but thou didst richly give drink to the assembly of the faithful, O Eupsychius, adornment of the holy martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Set me aright, who have wholly fallen down, having opened the door to the passions; and by thy good mediation lead me to the portals of repentance, and save me, O thou who gavest birth to the Savior and Lord of all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst join the assemblies of the martyrs and the divine choirs of the incorporeal ones, having prevailed over the irrationality of the passions; and thou didst contend excellently, O thrice-blessed athlete of Christ.

O thy goodly commerce! For thou didst trade a small quantity of blood for the kingdom on high, O wise one, wherein thou dost chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Wounded with the sword, thou didst fall, O martyr, but with thyself thou didst bring down Belial, who boasted unrestrainedly, and with thy mighty mind thou dealest incurable wounds to him who had wickedly attacked thee.

*Theotokion:* Inspired by the divine Spirit, O Virgin, the Prophet Daniel called thee the mountain from whence Christ was cut without the aid of human hands. And He hath crushed the false graven images.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst triumph over the tormentors and the unclean spirits, O athlete Eupsychius, and art the glory and boast of the faithful, who praise thee with sacred hymns and exalt Christ for all ages.

The sanctified people of Cæsaria hymn thee, O all-blessed martyr; for thy body, lying therein, poureth forth streams of healings, which overwhelm the passions and divinely bedew the hearts of the faithful.

Having bravely entered the arena of struggles, O martyr, thou wast lacerated in all thy members, and thine inner parts were laid bare; yet thou didst show thyself to be wholly unshaken, O invincible one. Wherefore, thou hast received crowns of victory.

*Theotokion:* O merciful Virgin who gavest birth to the merciful Word, freely take pity on me, who am lacking in loving-kindness, am accursed because of my boundless transgressions, who am unrepentant and have wasted my life in slothfulness.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou wast uplifted upon a tree, depicting the suffering of the Dispassionate One, Who easeth the sufferings of the pious in His loving-kindness, O martyr Eupsychius.

A great wonder was seen at thy repose: for instead of blood, milk and water flowed forth when thy head was severed, O martyr.

God Who alone is all-glorious hath been glorified by thy members, O most blessed one, in the glorification of thy most holy memory, as thou didst foretell.

Today the Church knoweth gladness in thy divine memory, O Eupsychius, whereon by thy supplications save all who hymn thee.

*Theotokion:* With the light of repentance, O Virgin, illumine me who am darkened by the night of sin and have been covered by the gloom of despondency.

