The 12th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints

Basil the Confessor, Bishop of Parium

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

With laudations is thy memory splendidly celebrated, O holy hierarch Basil; and it hath filled with joy the assemblies of the Orthodox, for thou didst love righteousness, the purity of chastity and meekness, and didst ever honor stillness with excellence and perfection.

Emulating the divine Paul in exiles patiently endured, O holy hierarch Basil, thou didst reach the end of thy life in need and tribulations, continually oppressed, and ever forced to move; but now through God thou hast found habitation and delight which is without care and immutable.

As a God-pleasing hierarch thou now lookest upon the never-waning beams of a noetic habitation, and, clothed in holiness and clad in righteousness, thou hast been vouchsafed to behold things which are above the earth; and, face to face, O thou who art most rich, thou seest the beauty of the magnificence of noetic things.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Save me, O all-pure Mistress, who ineffably gavest birth to Christ the Savior; for thee alone have I acquired as our intercessor, an invincible rampart, protection and joy, and the divine consolation of my soul. Wherefore, deliver me from the worm that sleepeth not and from the everlasting fire, O Mother of Christ God.

Stavrotheotokion—

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Lifted up upon the Tree, dost Thou die, Who sustainest all creation, granting life unto all?” weeping, the Theotokos said when she beheld the God and man Who had ineffably shone forth from her uplifted upon the Cross.

AT MATINS

Canon of the hierarch, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

The indescribable and thrice radiant light hath shone forth upon thee in the unshakable kingdom of heaven, O father, and the gladness of the righteous hath received thee.

The gates of Eden have been opened unto thee, O right glorious one; thou hast joined the holy hierarchs and been numbered among the Church of the firstborn.

Having suffered lawfully and preserved thy priesthood pure to the end, thou hast been vouchsafed to dance with the priests of heaven.

*Theotokion:* Having united Himself hypostatically to the flesh, receiving it from thee, O Mother of God, the Creator of all ineffably issued forth and was well pleased to draw nigh unto men.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thy right wondrous and all-glorious memory doth gladden the assemblies of the ­Orthodox with joy.

Shedding the cloud and breaking the bonds of the body, O venerable one, thou didst draw nigh unto God

As one elect, O venerable one, thou didst receive a blessed end and the delight of the chosen, as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as my helper, O all-pure Mother of God, I am not ashamed; and having thee as mine intercessor, I am delivered from mine enemies.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith…”—

A great sun hath shone forth upon the whole world in thy virtues, and thou hast enlightened the companies of the faithful with radiance and the splendors of miracles, and hast destroyed the darkness of the passions. O Basil our father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, who hast surpassed the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications cleanse me, who am dust, and am defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, granting me great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou dost suffer willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Making entreaty to God, O father, thou didst cast down the vaunted thought of wicked heresy and didst gladden the Church.

The Judge of the contest hath caused thee to dwell in the tabernacles of heaven, O father, accepting thy tireless opposition to those who fought against Him.

For the sake of the Traditions preserved in the Church of God, thou didst endure exile; and, winning victories, thou didst repose.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin, entreat God Who was born of thee, that He grant forgiveness of offenses to thy servants.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

The divine grace which abode within thee, O God-bearer, showed thee to be a most faithful pastor of the Church.

Having mortified the wisdom and passions of thy flesh, O glorious one, thou didst follow the Spirit of life.

Having achieved the end of thy life in chastity and righteousness, O divinely wise one, thou hast received reward for thy virtues.

*Theotokion:* As an all-holy temple, thou gavest birth to the Well-spring of dispassion, O most immaculate Virgin Mother.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Illumined with the beauty of heavenly effulgence, O venerable one, thou didst leave thy cathedra on earth, and, as one most meek, thou hast received an incorruptible inheritance of those who are meek on earth.

Mocking the deception of the blasphemous heretics, O right wondrous one, thou didst most diligently master the divine and pious understanding of the Orthodox: the veneration of the icon of the Savior.

Thy desire for God was fulfilled, O all-glorious one, for thou didst divinely pass over to Him, rejoicing; and now thou beholdest the splendors and beauties of the saints, O father.

*Theotokion:* Mankind hath been delivered from mortality and corruption; for thou didst seedlessly give birth to the Bestower of life by nature, O most immaculate Virgin, unto the benefit of those who praise thee with faith.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking in the highest…”—

Illumined by the light of the Most High, O blessed father, thou dost enlighten all who with love venerate thine honored suffering. O sacred athlete Basil, entreat Christ God unceasingly in behalf of us all!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O the ineffable gladness which thou hast been vouchsafed to receive, O most blessed one, living in immaterial light and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Beautifully adorned with the crown of divine magnificence, O most blessed one, thou joinest chorus, crying out with the armies on high: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

As an initiate of the mysteries of the Trinity, a minister of the mysteries of heaven, render the Master merciful to those who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Thou didst transform the ancient curse of Eve into a blessing, having given birth to the Son of God, to Whom we all cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Delivered from the sorrows of life and grievous turmoil, O most blessed one, thou didst receive joy and gladness past understanding, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Zealously opposing the blasphemies of the blasphemers with the doctrines of the Spirit, O father, thou didst easily break them asunder, O initiate of the mysteries, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

How beautiful is the place wherein thou hast made thine abode, O thou who art manifest in sanctity! How comely the habitation where thou abidest, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* All of us, the faithful, have acquired thee as our intercessor, O all-pure one, and, delivered from evils by thy supplications, we cry out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Thou didst live a holy life, O father, and having pleased God by thy works, thou hast received the kingdom of heaven, O wise one.

Having finished the race, having kept the Faith and completed the struggle, O Basil, thou hast received the crown of righteousness, rejoicing.

Thou didst receive a divine name, O all-blessed one, and the complete fulfillment of thy desires; wherefore, cease thou never to pray now for thy flock.

*Theotokion:* Spurn not the torrent of my tears, O Virgin who gavest birth to Christ Who taketh away every tear from every face.

