Also on The 14th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs Anthony, John and Eustathius, Slain for the Faith in Vilnius of Lithuania

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

With sacred hymns we praise you, O wise and godly athletes Anthony, John and Eustathius, ye proponents of the Faith, champions of piety, greatly radiant stars of the Church who by grace caused the darkness of falsehood to fade and shone forth the light of true knowledge of God.

O divine martyrs, ye were heavens declaring the mysteries of God and proclaiming His glory to all; for report of your struggles and faith hath gone forth unto all the ends of the Orthodox Church. Wherefore, the whole Church honoreth the sufferings which ye valiantly endured for Christ, O ever glorious ones.

When thy shins and bones were broken, thy thighs unnaturally shattered, and thy nose and ears severed, thou didst rejoice, O ever-memorable and most blessed Eustathius, cutting off the serpent’s head of idolatry. Wherefore, Christ God, the Judge of the contest, hath given thee the crown of victory.

Instructed by Nestor the priest, O all-praised ones who held the Orthodox belief in the all-divine Trinity, ye were enlightened by the Holy Spirit, and, arraying yourselves against the prince of this world, ye manfully overcame his wiles, triumphing over him with God’s help. Wherefore, celebrating your all-radiant memory today, with praises we honor your suffering, as is meet.

Giving yourselves over to wounds and torments, O holy ones, ye remained unshakable in your wisdom, and like lamps lighted by the fervor of the Spirit, ye illumine the hearts of the faithful with grace and dispel every ailment and every affliction. Wherefore, every race and generation doth celebrate your holy memory, glorifying the Lord with hymns.

With the radiance of your wonders, O martyrs, ye have illumined all creation, driving the gloom of sufferings and tribulations, the enmity of the demons and illnesses away from those who have recourse to you with tears and with faith entreat your aid, O valiant athletes of the Savior, Anthony, John and Eustathius. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate your holy and luminous solemnity.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Today the Church, arrayed in the blood and suffering of the new passion-bearers, as in new vesture of purple and fine linen, doth splendidly celebrate; for, having been nurtured in piety, they have brought to Thee, O Christ, an unblemished sacrifice, acceptable and right pleasing. Wherefore, O God our Savior Who hast shown them forth as vanquishers of the iniquitous, and hast crowned and glorified them, send down great mercy upon us by their supplications.

Now & ever…: dogmaticon—

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Like stars of great radiance, O all-praised athletes, ye illumine the ends of the world with divine splendors, doing away with demonic darkness, corrupting passions and misfortunes. Wherefore, assembling today, O glorious ones, we sing praises on your splendid, radiant and holy solemnity.

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

Let the wondrous, divine and all-wise passion-bearers be honored with sacred hymns; for, proclaiming with sanctity the uncreated Trinity before the enemy, they drowned the falsehood of polytheism in the outpourings of their blood and have received unfading glory.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

O blessed martyrs of great renown, ye wisely put to shame the iniquitous king who unlawfully commanded you to worship and render honor to inanimate and soulless gods, and, having suffered patiently and lawfully, ye fashioned crowns of victory, praying for the world.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Come, ye who love the martyrs, and, spiritually celebrating now the most sacred memory of the divinely crowned company of the martyrs, the unblemished wholeburnt offering sacrificed readily for Christ, the holy and chosen warriors, let us cry out to them: Crush ye the savagery of the ungodly Moslems, and from every evil circumstance deliver the pious people by your supplications.

Now & ever…: theotokion—

We have understood that God became incarnate of thee, O Virgin Theotokos. To Him do thou pray for the salvation of our souls.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O valiant and honored athletes who spurned earthly honors and glory: mightily and manfully did ye endure torments for the sake of the Faith, giving yourselves over to death for the Master, the Life of all. Wherefore, with a pillar of cloud from heaven did Christ all-gloriously illumine you. Standing before Him with the angels, pray ye that our souls be saved.

Or this troparion, in the same tone—

Having caused branches of the Orthodox Faith to spring forth from a barren root, O all-blessed ones, ye were shown to be namesakes of the protomartyr; for ye were not daunted by the wrath of the evil and impious prince, who commanded you to renounce Christ. Wherefore, having received crowns of victory, and standing with the angels before the throne of the Master, O all-blessed ones, pray for us who in Orthodox manner honor your holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

AT MATINS

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saints, twice . Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Like most magnificent stars ye ever enlighten the firmament of the honored Church and illumine the faithful, O divine martyrs, warriors of Christ.

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion—

O all-pure Virgin, thou receivest entreaty from us who have recourse to thy protection. Cease thou never to entreat Him Who loveth mankind, that He save thy servants.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross…”—

Enduring your torment with manly mind, O wondrous athletes, ye passed through fire and water, and crossed over to the broad plain of salvation, receiving your inheritance, the kingdom of heaven, wherein ye offer up divine entreaties for us, O wise and great martyrs.

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion—

O Mistress, with thanksgiving we hymn thee with all our heart and earnestly entreat thy mercy for thy servants who cry out, saying: Go thou before us and deliver us from enemies visible and invisible, and from every threat, for thou, O Virgin Theotokos, art our help.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify you, O holy martyrs Anthony, John and Eustathius, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye endured for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and they that hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like ­water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, ­Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

Bound, ye were led forth by the enemy and subjected to long imprisonment, yet were ye preserved by your faith and remained unharmed; and, though your bodies were cut in pieces by the sword, O holy ones, ye have manifestly been bound together by divine desire. Wherefore, ye have shone forth in the world like lamps, illumining all with the grace of the Spirit. O blessed passion-bearers, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion—

All of us, the generations of men, call thee blessed, in that thou, O Virgin, alone among women, gavest birth without seed unto God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou gavest suck to the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §36 \[10:16-22\]

The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us rejoice in the Lord on the day of the commemoration of the passion-bearers! Come, let us chant, mystically praising the athletes of Christ who committed the falsehood of idolatry to perdition and manifestly proclaimed Christ in the midst of the tribunal. Wherefore, O most blessed ones who suffered greatly, cease not to pray for our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraklysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the martyrs, with 8 troparia, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Made comely by the beauty of martyrdom, and filled with supernatural divine light, O glorious martyrs, therewith ye illumine those who honor your memory.

The divine martyrs rejected the words of the tyrant and considered his wrath, anger and pride as nought; and in gladness they endured a right praiseworthy death.

Made steadfast by the strength of the Almighty, O holy ones, and having your loins firmly girded about with the truth, ye truly destroyed the power and wiles of the wicked one.

*Theotokion:* Fortified by your power, O almighty Jesus, Who of old clothed Thyself in our weakness through the Virgin, the divine martyrs showed forth supernatural powers.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Having embraced love for the Lord, O true martyrs, and rejoicing in Him, ye truly surrendered your souls into His hands.

He Who accepted your suffering and endurance hath shown you to be healers of bodies and souls, O all-wise ones.

Having shaken off the ancient deception, O steadfast martyrs, ye willingly embraced new life, living for Christ rather than for man.

*Theotokion:* Cause me to share in the Day of never-waning light, O most pure Mother of God, delivering me from the coming darkness.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Ye did not render worship to material fire, O divinely eloquent ones, and have been delivered from the fire of Gehenna; and, though subjected to fire and torture, O saints, ye did not deny the Master of all, but, rejoicing, strove to preserve the Faith until death.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Tested in the fire of torture like gold in a crucible, ye were radiantly tried, O ever-memorable martyrs, and in your nature have been shown to be more precious than gold ; for, disclosing the all-radiant beauty of your souls, ye truly offered yourselves to the Master as most precious vessels, not having worshipped fire. Wherefore, pray to the Lord for us all, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor your memory with love.

Now & ever…: theotokion—

O Theotokos, accept the prayers of thy servants, and deliver us from every tribulation, in that thou gavest birth to Christ, the Savior of our souls.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ye showed yourselves to be friends of the Maccabees, valiant in your mighty opposition and headlong assault; and, refusing to eat abominable things, ye were undaunted by the rage of those wished to compel you.

Standing with the heavenly hosts before Him Who hath dominion over all, O valiant martyrs, deliver from perils and everlasting torment those who honor you.

Preserving the gift of most precious baptism undefiled, Thy passion-bearers rendered it yet more precious, sweetly emulating Thy death.

The valiant martyrs, emulating Thy death, O Master Christ, were hanged, rejoicing, from a tree and surrendered their souls to Thee, chanting: Glory to Thy power!

*Theotokion:* As thou didst foretell, O Mistress, the Master, Who alone is mighty in strength, hath wrought great things for thee, for all generations call thee blessed, O immaculate one.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Ye considered your prison a bridal chamber, O blessed martyrs, for there, rejoicing, ye betrothed yourselves to the comely Bridegroom; and, your souls transfixed by Him, ye hastened to Him with unrestrained desire.

“Beautiful art Thou, O Master and Bridegroom, and with pure souls we hasten after Thee,” the three martyrs cried aloud, rejoicing; “As Thou seest, we are bound together by Thy love and divine love for Thee.”

Ye followed after the Master, O holy ones, and, having the holy water of baptism propelling and sweetly moving you toward the struggle of martyrdom, ye gladly drained the cup of Christ.

*Theotokion:* The earth is full of thy glory, O Bride of God, and thou hast radiantly drawn all the choirs of the saints to thyself, prevailing upon them to forsake the sweet things of this world and to receive thy splendor.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Pitilessly beaten down with staves, the martyr Eustathius nonetheless uttered no sigh nor shed any tear; for he was harder than mighty adamant.

Strengthened by the power of God, O blessed martyr Eustathius, thou wast able to endure unbearable torments; wherefore, thou hast been counted worthy of divine gladness.

Hordes of evil demons were vanquished by the great quantity of the martyrs’ blood, O Bestower of life, and Thy Church hath been fortified thereby, hymning the glory of Thy power.

*Theotokion:* Resplendent in the beauty of virginity, O Mistress, thou wast the dwelling-place of the King of ages Whom thou didst bear, and Who preserveth Thee incorrupt even after thy birthgiving.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Having forsaken the deception of your fathers, O holy ones, ye cleaved unto Christ, and with ardor of soul stood firmly unto death with manly mind. Wherefore, ye have truly grasped the trophy of victory, unceasingly entreating our Master for us all.

*Ikos:* Beholding the struggle of the martyrs, we who love the feasts of the Church are astonished, as is meet, by their courage; and the choirs of the angels, rejoicing at their battle against the invisible foe, have called them blessed. The hordes of the demons, vanquished, avert their faces, and the Master of all gloriously adorneth the martyrs’ heads with crowns. Wherefore, we cry out to them: O blessed martyrs of Christ, pray ye for us all!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

O blessed ones, your honored memory hath appeared to us, letting fall joy and spiritual gladness, delighting our hearts and filling them with abundant joy.

Thy mind, which was captivated by beauties which transcend the senses, thou didst furnish with wings, O blessed Eustathius; thou didst not feel the breaking of thy thighs, and, hard as adamant amid thy tortures, thou didst endure the cutting away of thy scalp from thy body.

O wise martyr Eustathius, thou didst consider the beauty of the body, the mature flowering of youth, countenance and desire to be as nought; wherefore, thou hast now received divine sweetness.

His nose and ears cut off for Thy sake, O Savior, the martyr Eustathius magnified Thy power and hymned the incarnation of Thee Who vouchsafed unto him supernatural ­endurance.

*Theotokion:* We entreat thee as our salvation, O Theotokos: pray for us to Him Who was incarnate of thee.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O all-blessed ones, your precious blood, gushing forth, hath sanctified all creation, making you martyrs by the magnitude of its flow; for ye radiantly proclaimed God Who died for your sake.

O divinely eloquent martyrs, mightily aiding us all, ye have shown yourselves to be the indestructible foundation of the Church, the mighty bulwark of the faithful, surer than any earthly rampart.

The earth containeth your precious bodies, O God-bearers, but heaven holdeth your souls; wherefore, rejoice with the angels, O martyrs, chanting to the Lord the thrice-holy hymn: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Before thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, death was fearsome to men, but in latter times it was held by the saints to be an arena wherein they won life everlasting.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

The wondrous Eustathius was harrowed by thy discourse as with a plough, O wise Anthony, and the divinely wise John, receiving the seed of thy words like good soil, put forth the grain of martyrdom.

Having won honors by your great struggle, O all-wise martyrs, ye received from God rewards for your labor and pain. Him do ye entreat in behalf of us who commemorate you, O holy ones.

Standing now before the throne of the King of all and delighting in the good things which are to come, O divinely blessed ones, be ye mindful of those who honor your sacred ­memory.

*Theotokion:* Full of the living water of gladness, O Mistress, thou pourest forth gifts of grace, causing them to well forth abundantly upon all, for for thy sake hath every good thing been given to the world.

Exapostilarion—

Resplendent with the beauties of martyrdom, O martyrs, ye have now truly received from God the reward of your labors. Entreat ye the Benefactor in our behalf!

Glory…, Now & ever…: theotokion—

O all-hymned Maiden, thou gavest birth to Christ, the Angel of great Counsel, the King of glory, Whose Cross the martyrs took up, hastening after Him. With them pray thou unceasingly for us.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Holding the divine power of Christ as it were an invincible weapon, O blessed ones, ye cut through all the demonic powers and the incorporeal warriors of darkness, and laid hold of the trophies of victory; wherefore, standing before Christ, the Judge of the contest, pray ye for us who honor your memory. *Twice*

Refusing to worship fire, and being subjected to fire and torments, O ever memorable ones, ye received heavenly dew, divine rest and everlasting joy; and having utterly consumed the princes of darkness by your endurance of pain, O all-wise martyrs, ye have made the faithful steadfast in true piety.

Ye put in at the calm harbor, O wise martyrs, having been delivered from the tumultuous waves and billows of great turmoil; and gathering in everlasting life, the fruit of your pangs, remember us who honor your memory, O blessed ones.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

O true and valiant martyrs, neither the violence of the tyrant, nor his false blandishments, neither the severing of your members, nor the threat of death was able to separate you from the love of God; wherefore, as ye have boldness before Christ Who is God over all, by your supplications entreat Him to grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: theotokion, in the same tone—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III & 4 from Ode VI of the martyrs’ canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \[6: 10-17\]

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Matthew §36 \[10:16-22\]

The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

