The 15th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles

Aristarchus, Pudens & Trophimus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

With discourse of divine understanding ye utterly delivered the people from ignorance, O most wise apostles, and led them, saved, to the Word Who shone forth from the unbegotten Father. Him do ye entreat, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Let us manifestly praise the true preachers of Christ: Pudens and Aristarchus and the divine Trophimus; for with the warmth of divine grace they brought the winter of falsehood to an end, and have now made their abode in never-waning radiance, receiving the reward of their labors, and deified by ineffable communion.

Following Paul, the glorious disciple, ye endured many tribulations, O glorious ones, imprisoned in chains and subjected to pain; and finally ye suffered beheading by the sword. Entreat Christ, that He grant to our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Woe is me! What shall I do? With transgressions I have defiled my mind, soul and body! What shall I do? How shall I escape the unbearable flame and the unbreakable and everlasting bonds? Yet, before the end grant me remission, O most immaculate one!

Stavrotheotokion—

Once, when the unblemished Virgin beheld on the Tree Him to Whom she had given birth from her seedless womb, unable to endure the wounding of her womb, she said, rending her hair: “O Thou Who sustainest all creation, how hast Thou been uplifted upon the Cross as one condemned, desiring to save mankind in every way?”

AT MATINS

Canon of the apostles, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant a divine hymn to the disciples of God”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Standing as servants and ministers of Christ before the throne of God, as noetic luminaries, shine forth enlightenment upon us who honor your memory, O apostles.

He Who in His loving-kindness appeared on earth chose you as disciples and ministers, who with many others declare His divine will everywhere.

Forming the most sacred choir of the seventy sacred disciples of Christ, with Paul ye illumined the whole land with teachings of divine light.

The most sacred and glorious Pudens, the wise Aristarchus and Trophimus, shone forth on earth like radiant stars, dispelling the darkness of falsehood.

*Theotokion:* That He might join those below to those on high, God took flesh of thee in the excess of His loving-kindness, O all-pure one, yet remained what He was before His incarnation.

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

With the glorious Paul ye passed over all the earth like stars with the sun, dispelling the darkness of ignorance with the light of sacred preaching.

With great pain of their flesh the disciples of the Word removed painful sin from their midst, winning rest without pain for the faithful in the highest.

With divine struggles ye truly destroyed all the malice of the enemy, and, casting down the temples of the idols, ye made men temples for God.

*Theotokion:* With milk thou feedest the Nurturer of all Who was born of thine all-pure womb without corruption, O Virgin, and hath restored men broken with corruption.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Shining forth upon the world in godliness like the dawn, O apostles, by faith ye dispelled the most profound darkness of falsehood and enlightened men’s souls. Wherefore, the whole radiant Church hymneth your luminous memory today, magnifying Christ.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high unceasingly entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd hanging, dead, upon the Tree, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “How can I bear Thy condescension which is past recounting, O my Son, and Thy voluntary sufferings, O all-good God?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

The transcendent Trinity lit the sacred Pudens, Trophimus and Aristarchus like a triple lamp, illumining the land with divine discourse.

Ye were shown to be wise companions of Paul, and gladly endured multifarious persecutions and tribulations with him for the sake of the life which is to come, O glorious ones.

Suffering, ye hallowed all creation with the torrents of your blood, O apostles, and with the power of Christ abolished the vile blood-sacrifices offered to the demons.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, my might, refuge and invincible rampart, as thou art mine advocate before God, free me from everlasting flame and Gehenna.

Ode V

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

As preachers of God the glorious ones cast down graven images and the temples of the idols, raising up through grace the hearts of men like a tabernacle fallen through disobedience.

As steeds of God roiling the sea of ungodliness, by divine preaching the all-glorious ones truly brought life to those who before were drowning therein.

As our saviors, visited by God with your divine visitations, ye have saved those drowning in the pain of the madness of idolatry.

*Theotokion:* Illumined by the divine Spirit, the sacred Isaiah cried out of old in sanctity: Behold, a Virgin shall receive the infinite God, Who will become incarnate in His loving-kindness!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Let the all-wise Trophimus and Aristarchus, and the wondrous Pudens, be praised with sacred hymns as disciples of the Word and sacred companions of Paul.

Truly full of the water of the Spirit, ye have given every soul to drink of doctrine, wresting them from the midst of the flame of falsehood by divine grace.

United in the Spirit, ye were in nowise separated bodily; for ye were beheaded together with Paul your teacher, and with him are glorified.

*Theotokion:* Strange was thy conceiving, and strange, awesome and past understanding thy birthgiving, O Maiden, who reconcilest to God those estranged from Him of old, and restoring our primal beauty.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

This honored festival of the apostles hath appeared today, illumining us and dispelling the darkness of sin from those who cry: Light hath appeared and deliverance hath come!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

As apostles and divine athletes, ye quenched the furnace of impiety with showers of honorable preaching and consumed the tinder of idolatry with the torrents of your blood, O wise ones; wherefore, ye are glorified.

Ye were shown to be disciples of Christ subordinate to the twelve disciples, O glorious ones; for, traversing the whole world with Paul, ye endured many tribulations, and with him received a sacred end.

Ye adorned yourselves with your beautiful wounds, O glorious Aristarchus and Trophimus, and with the sacred Pudens became more lustrous than any gold, praying ever to Christ for us.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be blessed by the Holy Spirit, having given flesh to the Angel of great Counsel, Who sent His godly disciples into the world like divine flashes of lightning, to illumine the faithful, O pure one.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Severing the roots of ungodliness with the scythe of God, ye planted the true Faith and perfect understanding in the hearts of the pious, O divinely eloquent ones.

Ye cleared men’s hearts with divine discourse, sowing therein the seed of understanding, O wise apostles, and ye reaped grain of surpassing fruitfulness, the multitude of the saved.

Let Aristarchus, Pudens and Trophimus be honored as the unshakable pillars of the Church of Christ, the divine grapes of the vine of God, exuding the sweetness of life.

*Theotokion:* By thy recent birthgiving, O Virgin, thou hast renewed all of broken humanity, restoring the bonds of nature in manner transcending nature, O joyous Mother of the living God.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

The might of the proud one hath been taken away, and his vaunted arrogance hath fallen; for the saints, wrestling with him in the weakness of their flesh, triumphed and destroyed him, and have delivered the faithful from his tyranny.

Scattering falsehood like dust, ye showed yourselves to be true guides for men, and have become fellow citizens with the angels, chanting with them: Holy, Holy, Holy are the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit!

Healing the infirmities and pangs of body and soul, O apostles of the Lord, and working wondrous miracles, ye have drawn all who are in ignorance to the understanding of the true Light; wherefore, ye are blessed.

Ye now delight in the immaterial mind which is celebrated in the heavens, O apostles, having received your blessed hope. O divine preacher Trophimus, most excellent Pudens and glorious Aristarchus, be ye mindful of us!

*Theotokion:* O all-pure and joyous Maiden, who in manner past understanding gavest birth to the unbearable Fire, free me from the flame of Gehenna, and set my soul afire with the love of Him Who came to send to earth the fire of understanding.

