The 25th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle & Evangelist Mark

AT GREAT VESPERS

We chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 5 for the Evangelist, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

The writer of divinely uttered words, the great instructor of Egypt, O ye faithful, let us hymn as is meet, crying aloud: O wise Mark, disciple of Christ, cease thou never to guide us all by teachings and supplications, to the life which is untroubled. *Twice*

Thou wast the companion of Paul, the chosen vessel, and with him didst traverse all of Macedonia; and being in Rome the disciple of Peter, thou wast shown to be a recounter of sweet things; and thou didst repose in Egypt, having suffered in godly manner, O Mark, thou friend of Christ. *Twice*

Withered and barren souls didst thou revive with the radiant sprinkling of the Gospel. Wherefore, O divine Mark, today Alexandria doth celebrate thy memory with us and offereth praise unto thee, bowing down before thy relics.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth into thy mouth, O apostle Mark, and thou wast a shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity in one Godhead.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings…

A Reading from the General Epistle of James \(1:1-12\)

James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers trials, knowing this, that the testing of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but the rich, in that he is made low, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and its flower falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth; so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to those who love Him.

A Reading from the General Epistle of James \(1:13-27\)

Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth He any man; but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Do not err, my beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with Whom is not variableness, neither shadow of turning. Of His own will begot He us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of His creatures. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. Wherefore, put away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But be ye doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like a man beholding his natural face in a mirror; for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. But whosoever looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth in it, he being not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is vain. Pure religion and undefiled before God the Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself undefiled by the world.

A Reading from the General Epistle of James \(2:1-13\)

My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect to persons. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in fine apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect to him who weareth the fine clothing, and say unto him, “Sit thou down here in a good place;” and say to the poor, “Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool,” are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges with evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved brethren: hath not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which He hath promised to those who love Him? But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name whereby ye are called? If ye fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, ye do well; but if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin, and are convicted by the law as transgressors. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he who said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law. So speak ye, and so do, as they who shall be judged by the law of liberty. For he shall have judgment without mercy, who hath shown no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs…”—

O divinely wise Mark, thou wast the pen of a most wise and swiftly writing scribe, recording in divinely inspired manner the incarnation of Christ, and clearly proclaiming the words of eternal life. Pray thou that those who hymn thee and honor thy glorious memory be assigned thereto.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

O all-praised Mark, preaching Christ thou didst pass over the world like the sun, destroying all the darkness of polytheism with beams of faith. And now, pray thou that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

O apostle Mark, in those lands where before the ignorance of ungodliness had increased, thou didst preach, dispelling the darkness of Egypt with the enlightenment of thy words, O divine preacher most rich. And now, pray thou that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Come ye all, and with psalms and hymns let us praise the preacher of the mystery of heaven, the servant of the Gospel; for he is shown to be a river of the noetic paradise, watering spiritual furrows with heavenly showers, and showing them forth as fertile for Christ God Who, through his supplications, granteth cleansing, enlightenment and great mercy unto all.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion, in Tone III—

O holy apostle and evangelist Mark, entreat the merciful God, that He grant our souls remission of transgressions.

\[Or this troparion, in the same tone—

Or this troparion, in the same tone—

Thou wast an apostle of Christ who learned from the preëminent Peter, and didst shine like the sun upon the lands of the Alexandrians, being their adornment. Through thee was Egypt freed from deception, O blessed one, who as the Church’s pillar of fire dost illumine all with thy teaching of the Gospel. Wherefore, honoring thy memory, we keep splendid festival, O divinely eloquent Mark. Entreat God Who was announced by thee, that He grant our souls remission of offenses.

Glory…, Now & ever…, Theotokion.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory…, the troparion of the evangelist; Now & ever…, the troparion of the feast, again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Thou hast shone forth in splendor upon the world like the dawn, hast driven away the profound darkness of deception by faith, O apostle, and enlightened our souls. Wherefore, the whole Church today doth radiantly hymn thy luminous memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Having learned wisdom from the Source of life, thou didst make wise those who before, in ignorance, had insanely worshiped graven images. Wherefore, thou art blessed forever, standing before the throne of the Holy Trinity, praying fervently that we find remission of our transgressions, O apostle Mark. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy apostle and evangelist Mark, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having set at nought the pride of the idols, desiring the sufferings of the Savior, O apostle Mark, thou wast revealed to the world by heaven, pouring forth wonders upon all, and wast a teacher of the nations, O all-blessed one. Wherefore, we honor thy memory as is meet, glorifying and faithfully magnifying thee in hymns. O divinely eloquent one who art most rich, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

The Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the world, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

“Let every breath praise the Lord.”

Gospel according to Luke, § 50 \[Lk. 10: 1-15\]

At that time, the Lord also appointed seventy other disciples of His, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your way out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth into thy mouth, O apostle Mark, and thou wast a shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity in one Godhead.

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the evangelist, with 8 troparia, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

Praising Mark, the beholder of God, I invoke the grace of the Spirit, that, radiantly inspiring me, He may remove mine ignorance and grant me a divine wealth of wisdom.

Having illumined Thy divinely eloquent one with the light of grace, O Savior, Word of God, as the Cause of all good Thou didst send to the world him who hath preached unto us the glad tidings of Thy coming.

A disciple of the most wise Peter, and enriched by having been adopted by him, O most glorious Mark, thou wast shown to be an initiate of the mysteries of God and art a joint heir of His glory.

*Theotokion:* He who drowned the Egyptians in the deep through the cloud of the Spirit afterwards came through thee, the pure one, to the Egyptians, and through Mark set them free from deception.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

The glorious Mark, Thy favored one, being illumined with rays of Thy light, preached Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom Who appeared to all the world, granting life and enlightening men, O Master Who lovest mankind.

O Thou Who lovest mankind, Thine eye-witness Mark, having received an ever-flowing stream of wisdom resounding like a river, hath watered the ends of the earth with the light of divine knowledge, truly revealing Thy prophecy.

Manifestly following Peter, O wise one, as his disciple thou didst record the Gospel, receiving from him the light of theology and openly proclaiming the coming of God in the flesh, O apostle.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst cause the temples of the demons to quake, O Thou Who wast aforetime borne to Egypt in the Virgin’s arms, and thither Thou didst send Mark, that all might know of Thy divine mystery and that Thou hadst become man.

Kontakion and Ikos from the Pentecostarion.

Sessional hymn of the evangelist, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Having ascended to the summit of virtue, O divine Mark, as a godly preacher thou hast thundered down upon us the great mysteries of the dogmas of salvation. Wherefore, in faith we entreat thee, O all-blessed one: free us from every sorrow, offense and misfortune.

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth, O most wise one, and the power of thy words manifestly extendeth to the ends of the world, like David splendidly preaching our salvation and renewal.

Like lightning hath Thy most wise apostle appeared to the world, O Savior, announcing the joy of truth, illumined with the divine radiance of effulgence, unto our salvation and renewal.

Thy feet were adorned prophetically, for ineffably hast thou announced unto us the Peace that hath manifestly revealed Himself in the flesh to the ends of the world, unto our salvation and renewal.

*Theotokion:* The Word sat upon the cloud of the Virgin and, in that He is merciful, He made foolish the counsels of Egypt and hath destroyed thoughts adverse to God through the teachings of the divine Mark, unto our salvation and renewal.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

Thou didst let fall the sweetness of piety, the shower of thy divine words, casting light over all in bright beams, clearly revealed by the grace of the noetic Sun, O most blessed and God-pleasing Mark.

From the house of the Lord thou didst pour forth a wellspring and dost water barren hearts abundantly with spiritual streams, teaching them to bring forth fruit instead of barrenness, O apostle.

Thou wast the son of the great Peter, and illumined by his teaching thou didst enlighten the souls who approached thee fervently, O blessed apostle, seer of God.

*Theotokion:* O Christ Who shone forth from the Father before all creation, and wast born of the Virgin as a man, Thou wast sent to the Egyptians. For them, O Wise One, Thou didst anoint Mark who hath taught them the mysteries of divine knowledge.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

Thou didst set at nought the scorn of the wicked, O Lord, and didst put down their prideful arrogance, showing forth Thine apostle as a conqueror by Thy might, for Thou art the strength and restoration of the afflicted.

By thy words, O wise Mark, thou didst preach the Fashioner of creation, the Crown of hope wherewith we are now crowned, and which, to our glory, hath been wrought of the nature of the flesh.

O glorious one, the preëminent Peter clearly instructed thee to record the precious Gospel mystically, showing thee to be a servant of divine grace, for thou didst shed the light of divine knowledge upon us.

*Theotokion:* Through the Virgin Mother of God didst Thou enlighten Egypt which aforetime was in darkness, entering it as an infant, O Lord; and Thou didst reprove its vanity through the teachings of the divinely eloquent Mark, O Thou Who lovest­ ­mankind.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Receiving from on high the grace of the Spirit, thou didst destroy the snares of the orators, O apostle, and, hunting all the nations, thou didst lead them to thy Master, O most glorious Mark, preaching the divine Gospel.

*Ikos:* A disciple of the preëminent apostle, with him thou didst preach Christ the Son of God, rendering steadfast upon the rock of truth those who were shaken by falsehood. Do thou also make me steadfast thereon, and set aright my steps, that, delivered from the snares of the enemy, I may glorify thee without faltering, for thou hast enlightened all, O wise Mark, preaching the divine Gospel.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

Illumined with divine rays, thou dost mystically, by reflection, emit radiant beams, O most blessed Mark, for thou didst preach the Word incarnate, the Timeless One, the praised and most glorious God of our fathers.

O Maker of all, having armed thy divinely eloquent disciple with divinely effective power, Thou didst make of him a wonderworker, for he hath dispelled affliction and healed wounds, preaching Thee, the all-praised and most glorious God.

Having as teacher the divine Peter, the first in rank among the choir of the apostles, thou didst show thyself to be like unto him, for thou didst bring order to all the fullness of the Church of the all-praised and most glorious God of our fathers.

*Theotokion:* Following the saying of Isaiah, O most glorious one, thou didst thyself set up a pillar in Egypt: the scripture of thy Gospel, for Him Who, without seed, was born of the Mother of God, proclaiming our all-praised and most glorious God.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Christ, the Word begotten of the Father before all ages, Who clothed Himself in human nature, didst thou preach, O glorious one; and thou didst cry aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord for all ages!

O glorious one, thou didst glorify Christ Who gave Himself as deliverance from our offense and passion and raised up the fallen; and thou didst cry: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord for all ages!

Submitting to the most wise teaching of Peter, O Mark, thou didst most wisely commit to writing the precious Gospel for the faithful who cry out: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Bearing Emmanuel as an infant, the Virgin stood before the Egyptians, to whom Mark is sent like a radiant star, crying aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Having attained unto the ineffable source of the effulgence of the threefold Sun, O thou who art divinely revealed, thou dost delight in deification most pure and clear, which surpasseth understanding, unceasingly holding chorus with the angels, O most blessed one.

Having shared in the teaching and divine preaching of Peter, thou dost live with him in the mansions of heaven, O divinely eloquent and most blessed one, and dost pray for us, O apostle Mark.

The Light, thrice-radiantly joined and strangely unified, didst thou piously preach, O right worthy one, illumined by a ray of grace. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Ever offer supplication in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* The honored apostle Mark was given as a holy hierarch to the Egyptians, to whom the Lord of glory had also come, incarnate as a babe through the pure Virgin Mother of God; and Him do we magnify as is meet.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Having been taught heavenly wisdom, with thy tongue thou didst destroy the webs of the orators and the calculations of the astrologers, O most glorious apostle Mark; and as a disciple of Peter thou didst preach the words of the Gospel to the world. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 3 for the evangelist, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs…”—

O most blessed Mark, thou didst drink from a sweet stream, the pure river of peace which doth flow most splendidly from Eden, flooding the face of the earth with the waters of thy preaching of the Gospel and pouring forth divinely inspired teachings upon the firmament of the Church.

O Mark most glorious, in times past Moses drowned the Egyptians in the sea, but thou, O most wise one, didst lead them forth from the sea of deception by the power of Him Who had come to them in the flesh and utterly destroyed the works of the their hands with His lofty arm.

O Mark most sacred, abiding in the light of the Spirit, thou wast wholly spiritual; and now, O thou who art most rich, deified by adoption and through abundant visions and most blessed radiance, thou hast attained the summit of thy mystery, the longed-for goal.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O fisherman most wise, holy disciple, husbandman of the Savior and recounter of His sufferings, thou who didst traverse the world with faith, and, having gathered the deluded gentiles, didst lead them to God: as a sweet-smelling fragrance of incense hast thou been wafted up to the heavens. Wherefore, standing before the Judge, pray that we be delivered from our transgressions and from torment on the day of judgment.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Great Doxology, troparia, litanies and dismissal.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the Pentecostarion; and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the evangelist.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

General Epistle of Peter, § 63 \[I Pet. 5: 6-14\]

Brethren: Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in due time: casting all your care upon Him; for He careth for you. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, Who hath called us unto His eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that he have suffered a little while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand. The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Mark my son. Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Mark, § 23 \[Mk. 6: 7-13\]

At that time, Jesus called unto Him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; and commanded those who they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: but be shod with sandals; and not put on two coats. And He said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into a house, there abide till ye depart from that place. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgement, than for that city. And they went out, and preached that men should repent. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

