Also on The 26th Day of the Month of April

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints Stephen, Bishop of Perm

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

When divine love came upon thee, O all-wise Stephen, then, forsaking all carnal wisdom, thou didst follow Christ without turning back, and, emulating the apostles, didst preach God to the ignorant in faraway lands, and didst guide them all to the light of divine knowledge out of their darkness; wherefore, Christ, Whom thou didst serve, hath crowned thee with heavenly wreaths. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.

When divine desire descended upon thee, O holy hierarch, then, forsaking all the deceptive wisdom which is in the world, thou didst seek that which is higher, desiring to ascend on high; hence, receiving wisdom not from men or through men, but from the providence of the Most High, thou didst devise a new alphabet to transmit the knowledge of Christ, and God became known to an ignorant people through thee. Him do thou beseech, O all-wise Stephen, that He save and enlighten our souls.

When divine knowledge came upon thee, O holy hierarch Stephen, then, moved by the Holy Spirit, thou didst come to enlighten a people who from of old had lain in the darkness of unbelief, and, enlightening them, didst move them toward the light of divine knowledge, and didst teach them to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, the one Godhead, Whom do thou entreat in our behalf, O all wise and holy hierarch, that He save and enlighten our souls.

And 3 stichera in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

With thy teaching, O blessed Stephen, thou didst cultivate the hearts of the unbelieving people which of old had become stony; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, greatly bless thee as a teacher and instructor in piety.

Thy tongue became the pen of a swiftly writing scribe, O holy hierarch, explaining to all the mighty works of God. Thou didst lead men to a knowledge of God, and didst show forth Pamoi, the deviser of evil, as one mocked with ridicule; wherefore, assembling in spirit, we honor thy dormition.

Casting down the temples of the idols, O all-wise and holy hierarch, thou didst utterly destroy them, and didst consecrate churches in which Christ might be known; wherefore, we, thy spiritual children, hymn thee as an instructor in piety, and make supplication: Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

All the priests of the idols marvelled at thy wisdom and intelligent discourse, and they reviled their own vain religion as ungodly, and believed with all their soul upon Christ, Whom thou didst preach. Him do thou entreat, O all-wise Stephen, that all be saved who celebrate thy sacred festival and honor thy most holy memory with faith.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

When the righteous man is praised, the people will rejoice; for the memorial thereof is immortal: because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Wherefore, O ye people, love wisdom, and ye shall live; desire it, and ye shall be instructed, for the beginning thereof is love and the keeping of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide mysteries from you. For it is He that leadeth unto wisdom, and directeth the wise, the Author of all understanding and workmanship. For wisdom, which accomplisheth all things, hath taught me: for in her is an understanding spirit, holy, the brightness of the everlasting Light and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh them friends of God, and prophets, and is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order of stars: being compared with the light, she is found before it. She delivered from pain those that attended upon her, and guided them in the right paths, and gave him knowledge of holy things; she kept him safe from those who lay in wait; in a sore conflict she gave him the victory: that all might know that godliness is stronger than all. But vice shall not prevail against wisdom, neither shall evil ever overcome wisdom, nor the wicked circumvent the judgment which accuseth them. For the ungodly said, reasoning with themselves, but not aright: “Let us oppress the righteous man, and let us not spare his holiness, nor feel shame before the gray hairs.of the elderly. Let our strength be the law of judgment: therefore, let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not pleasing to us, and is contrary to our doings; he upbraideth us with our offending the law and denounceth our offenses against our teaching. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He hath become for us a reproof against our thoughts, and is grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as counterfeits. He abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness; he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see, therefore, if his words be true, and let us prove what shall happen in the end of him. Let us examine him with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his innocence. Let us condemn him with a shameful death: for by his own saying he shall be respected.” Such things did they imagine, and were deceived: for their own wickedness hath blinded them, and as for the mysteries of God, they knew them not, neither did they understand that Thou art the one God, Who hast power of life and death, Who savest in time of tribulation and deliverest from every evil. Thou art compassionate and merciful, granting grace to Thy saints, but resisting the proud with Thine upraised arm.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple; and this sticheron of the holy hierarch, in Tone II—

Like the apostles thou didst teach all to believe in the Trinity One in essence, the sole Godhead; wherefore, honoring thee as is meet, we all bless thee as a spiritual father, an emulator of the apostles, the kinsman of holy hierarchs, and we make entreaty: Pray thou, that all who honor thy sacred memory be saved.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Thou wast the dwelling-place and habitation of the all-holy Spirit, O all-wise Stephen; wherefore, do thou also make us who honor thy sacred memory into a habitation for Him.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed in righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Thy life shone forth like the sun in the hearts of the unbelievers, emitting the radiance of teachings; wherefore, do thou also illumine with never-waning light us who honor thy sacred memory.

*Stichos:* The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

Cease not in thy supplications, O Stephen, for thy spiritual children whom thou didst beget through baptism, that we may all venerate thine honorable dormition.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

As a treasury of wisdom, O holy hierarch Stephen, thou didst illumine the hearts of the unbelieving with thy teaching, planting therein the seeds of piety; wherefore, as is meet, we all bless thee as an all-wise teacher, and we implore thee: Entreat Christ, Whom thou didst serve from thy youth, that He deliver us from the assaults of the enemy and save our souls.

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Troparion of the hierarch, in Tone IV—

Afire with divine desire from the years of thy youth, O all-wise Stephen, thou didst take up the burden of Christ, and, sowing the divine seed in the hearts of the people, which had from of old been hardened by unbelief, thou didst spiritual beget them evangelically; wherefore, honoring thine all-glorious memory, we beseech thee: Entreat Him Whom thou didst preach, that He save our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion from the Pentecostarion.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion from the Pentecostarion, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…, that from the Pentecostarion, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed by the Jews…”—

Knowing thee to be a most excellent curer of the passions of the soul, O holy hierarch Stephen, we implore thee: Pray thou that the sufferings of retribution be lifted from us, that, finding thee as the cause of all good things, we may cry aloud: Glory to Him Who hath given thee wisdom! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who bestoweth enlightenment upon all through thee! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Cleaving unto virtue from childhood, O holy hierarch Stephen, thou becamest a vessel of the Holy Spirit; and having learned wisdom from Him, thou didst teach men to cast aside their idols and to believe in Christ. Him do thou entreat, that He save all who honor thee with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Stephen, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having been taught wisdom from on high and united thyself unto God, following the Gospel thou didst forsake the world, and having betaken thyself to faraway places, through baptism thou didst bring all to the knowledge of Christ; wherefore, thou didst cry out unto all: “Come to know God, and ye shall find grace!” O all-wise hierarch Stephen, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy most precious memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 35, from the midpoint \[Jn. 10: 1-8\]

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

All the priests of the idols marvelled at thy wisdom and intelligent discourse, and they reviled their own vain religion as ungodly, and believed with all their soul upon Christ, Whom thou didst preach. Him do thou entreat, O all-wise Stephen, that all may be saved who celebrate thy sacred festival and honor thy most holy memory with faith.

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Having studied the sacred Scriptures from thy childhood, O God-bearing Stephen, thou didst travel to faraway places, and through thee God was made known unto the infidels.

Where falsehood was worshiped, God hath now been made known to the unbelievers through thee, O holy hierarch Stephen; wherefore, we bless thy sacred memory as is meet.

With thy divinely inspired doctrine thou didst teach the people to believe in Christ and to turn away from the falsehood of idolatry; wherefore, with hymns we all honor thee as an emulator of the apostles.

*Theotokion:* In thine arms, O Bride of God, thou didst bear Him Who alone sitteth in the highest and became flesh; for thou wast chosen from among all ages to be a worthy receptacle of the Almighty.

Canon II of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

When thou didst arrive in Perm, O all-wise hierarch Stephen, thou didst cast down the falsehood which had exalted itself, and by thine all-wise teachings didst put evil sorcery to shame.

Thou didst mightily shatter the weapons of the demons, O holy hierarch Stephen, and, conquering them by the power of God, to all thou didst confess Christ as the true God; wherefore, thou hast received a crown from Him.

Afire with divine love, O father, thou wast not daunted by the length of thy journey, nor by the opposition of the ungodly of those parts, but didst endure all and didst lead all to Christ.

*Theotokion:* From a royal root thou didst cause Christ the King, the Word of God, to spring forth, and didst give birth to Him through thy pure blood in manner transcending comprehension and understanding, in two natures but a single hypostasis.

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Thou wast not afraid of the people who were then unbelievers, O holy hierarch, but didst boldly commit their temple and its idols to the fire; and didst teach all to cry: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord! *Twice*

With thy wonted courage and humility thou didst transform murderers into meek lambs; wherefore, thou hast been crowned with a diadem, O holy hierarch Stephen.

*Theotokion:* Having acquired thee as sure assistance, O Mother of God, setting our hope on thee we are saved, and fleeing to thee, we are all preserved.

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest ­mankind.

As a wise and intelligent work-fellow, thou didst prefer nobility of soul over the pleasures of the flesh, for thou revealest most wise teachings unto all, O father, and didst lead a new people to the knowledge of God.

Having rid thy mind of the turmoil of the passions, emulating Christ thou didst go forth to seek for the lost; and having found them, thou chantest with them to Him: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord!

Having acquired a divinely eloquent tongue, O holy hierarch, thou didst teach the people the mysteries of theology, to believe in the Trinity, the one God, Whom do thou entreat in our behalf, O Stephen.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, we all know thee as the staff which put forth Christ, the incorrupt Flower, and the golden censer, who bore in thine arms the Coal of the divine Essence, O thou who art divinely blessed.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

O ye faithful, let us laud the all-praised Stephen, the all-wondrous mind and vigilant teacher, who adorned the Church with sacred acts, and who by his own discourse preserved his spiritual children unharmed, driving away from the sheep of Christ the sorcerer who like a wolf had bedeviled them with his vexatious teachings; and let us say: Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Thy pure life shone forth like the sun, O holy hierarch, driving away from the people the gloom of the madness of idolatry; and thou didst teach all to cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

As one who is all-wise, thou didst put to shame the foolish words of the sorcerers, and with thy discourses, as with a sling, thou didst drive them away from the flock of Christ, and didst teach all to say: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

As a true hierarch, peaceable and meek, O father, thou wast shown to be a pillar of devotion to the Church, teaching thy people piety, that they might cry unto Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thee do we set forth as a weapon against the enemy, O Mother of God, whereby we repel all the sorrows of evil circumstances and escape the turmoil of heresy.

Canon II

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Pray that the people be saved whom thou didst enlighten by thy teaching and didst teach to cry: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind. *Twice*

Having received from God the election of the priesthood, invested with power from on high, like the apostles thou didst enlighten people in the darkness of idolatry and didst teach them to cry: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* Of old the ark which received the divinely inscribed law prefigured thee, O most immaculate one, who ineffably conceived in thy womb the Word of God Who richly nourisheth the souls of those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Of old thou didst by thy teaching raise up a people who lay in darkness of unbelief, and didst show them forth as children of God and heirs of the light; wherefore, O holy hierarch, with love of wisdom we all honor thee.

The wisdom of the Holy Spirit having by grace poured itself forth in thy lips, thou didst lead the people to the knowledge of Christ, O holy hierarch.

In that thou standest before the great Light as one crowned, O holy hierarch, be thou mindful of thine excellent inheritance which thou didst acquire by manifold labors, O father, that we may all call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* The noetic Sun shone forth from thee and spread the radiant beams of His divinity upon all, O Mistress Theotokos; wherefore, we all glorify thee.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Enkindled by divine zeal, O holy hierarch, thou didst commit the vain idols to the fire of utter destruction; and having led the unbelievers to the Faith, thou didst teach all to believe in the one Godhead in three Persons.

The accursed sorcerer who desired to turn the people of Christ away from the Faith was put to shame when God glorified thee, O most sacred and all-wise Stephen.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast adorned with the beauties of virginity and didst cover the shame of the nakedness of Eve, O thou who gavest birth unto Christ Who bestoweth the vesture of immortality upon those who honor thee.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

With the plough of thy words thou didst cultivate the stony hearts of the people, O holy hierarch, and, having planted in them the divine seed, thou didst produce for Christ beautiful fruit.

Extinguishing the conflagration of idolatry with the rushing streams of thy teachings, O all-wise Stephen, with thy divine discourses thou didst make steadfast the hearts of the faithful.

Teaching the people to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, O all-wise Stephen, thou didst lead them away from the pollution of idolatry to the living God.

*Theotokion:* Rend thou asunder the record of mine offenses, O Mistress, granting me release from the griefs and sorrows which beset me, and preserve me unharmed.

Canon II

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Receiving the pastoral staff, O all-glorious hierarch Stephen, thou becamest a teacher for a new people, becoming all things to all men, like the apostle, that thou mightest lead all to Christ. *Twice*

Thy tongue was a two-edged word wielded against the wicked sorcerer, O holy hierarch, cutting down his vile teaching; wherefore, we glorify thee with sacred hymns.

*Theotokion:* The all-accomplishing Spirit descended upon thee, O most immaculate one, and the Word of God made His abode within thee. He ineffably became flesh, yet remained immutable.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

Thou wast found to be called not for those who sought thee, O holy hierarch, but, freeing men from the falsehood of idolatry, thou didst lead them to the Christian Faith and didst put to shame the sorcerer Pamoi; wherefore, thou becamest the first bishop and teacher of Perm. For this cause, we, thy spiritual children, as ones delivered by thee from idols, cry out to thee in hymns of thanksgiving: Rejoice, O Stephen, all-wise teacher!

*Ikos:* Untouched by any passionate attachment to the world, O father, from thy youth thou didst cleave unto wisdom and didst attain unto the active art of theology; and thou didst go forth unto faraway lands, where the people had no knowledge of God, but in their delusion worshiped demons. There, as an apostle, thou didst teach them to believe in Christ; and, destroying their idols and putting their sorcerer to shame, thou becamest a holy hierarch for them. Wherefore, we, thy spiritual children, as ones delivered by thee from idols, cry out to thee hymns of thanksgiving: Rejoice, O Stephen, all-wise teacher!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

That ungodly shaman who uttered blasphemy against piety thou didst drive away from the new people of the flock of Christ as one iniquitous, O all-wise one; and we cry out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers! *Twice*

As thou hast all-gloriously passed from the world to that which transcendeth the world, O holy hierarch, and hast drawn nigh unto God by thy manner of life and participation in Him, thou dost chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thee from the primal curse, O all-glorious Mistress, passing on to everlasting life we cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou who gavest birth to God for us!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Vanquished by thee, O all-blessed Stephen, the ungodly sorcerer fled, and we are all delivered from his evil and spells, crying out unto Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

We who of old were enlightened cry out to thee, O all-wondrous hierarch Stephen, as to one living: Forsake not us who are thy children, as thou didst promise, that with thee we may all cry out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Having been anointed as a hierarch with the oil of divine joy, thou didst lead a new people to the knowledge of Christ, and didst teach them all to cry unto Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Now have all things been filled with light by thee, O all-pure one; for thou hast been shown to be the portal through which God hath communicated with the world, enlightening those who cry with faith: Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O all-pure one!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Instructed by thy words, O holy hierarch, and having come to the light of divine understanding out of the darkness of idolatry, we thy children cry out to Christ with one voice: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever! *Twice*

The light of the three-Sunned Trinity having made its abode in thy godly heart, thou didst enlighten all the people with holy baptism and didst teach them to cry out to the Creator and Deliverer: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Holding thee to be the Theotokos, O all-immaculate one, with mouth and mind we hymn thee; for thou, O all-pure one, gavest birth unto God the Lord Who clothed Himself in the flesh. Wherefore, we hymn and exalt thee supremely forever.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Thou wast shown to be a brave warrior, O all-blessed one, demolishing the temples of the idols; and having delivered the people from them, thou didst teach them to cry unto Christ with all their soul: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Having penetrated to the depths of the Holy Spirit, thou didst draw forth divine understanding therefrom; wherefore, thou didst embellish the Church with Orthodoxy, that it might cry unto the Creator and Deliverer: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Having put on the armor of Christ, thou didst drive the wicked demons away from men; wherefore, with the holy hierarchs thou hast received a heavenly inheritance, O father, and with them thou criest out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Eve was driven away from the tree of life, of which she was forbidden to partake; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast poured forth upon the world Life everlasting, Who giveth life-bearing activity to the faithful.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

By thy labors on the earth, O holy hierarch, thou didst receive rest in heaven, where the choirs of the saints and the most radiant celebration of the righteous are; wherefore, be thou mindful of us who ever glorify thy memory.

Desiring to receive eternal and incorruptible things, O holy hierarch, and forsaking the pleasures conceived in the world, thou didst follow after Christ; wherefore, thou hast joined the choir of hierarchs, O all-glorious one.

Having learned the dogmas of piety, O all-wise and holy hierarch, thou becamest an emulator of the apostles, casting down the falsehood of idolatry; wherefore, we bless thy memory as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to assume the flesh, God made His abode within thee, finding thee alone to be the Theotokos who is more holy than all; and He truly revealed thee to be both Mother and Virgin.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Ever moved by divine desire, and having mastered wisdom and understanding, O all-praised holy hierarch, thou didst turn the people away from falsehood, and didst teach them to believe in the living God.

Thou wast a great paragon, leading all good men to the life on high by thy humility and meekness; wherefore, Christ made thee a shepherd of His people. Him do thou beseech, that He save all who hymn thee.

By thy desire for God thou didst lull the uprisings of the passions, and by standing whole nights in prayer thou didst receive the gift of beholding the ineffable beauties of heaven, O Stephen.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, thou wast shown to be the one who supernaturally gave birth to the Word of God, Whom the Father begot before all the ages, in that He is good. Him do we now know to transcend the body, even though He is clothed in a body.

Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch—

Receiving hierarchal election not for men or from men, but from God, O all-wise Stephen, by thy teaching thou hast now made those who before were children of darkness into children and heirs of the Light. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

As one all-wise, thou didst repulse the vain and foolish words of the cruel and evil Pamoi, and didst drive him away from the flock of Christ, as though he were a wolf, and as an apostle thou didst teach the people; wherefore, assembling today with love of wisdom, we all-gloriously honor thy precious memory, O holy hierarch. *Twice*

O thou who with the understanding given thee from on high didst ponder well the things that are here, conceiving a desire for the things which lead to God, like a deer thou didst hasten to streams of water; and the people who from of old had lain in the darkness of unbelief thou didst make children and heirs of the light through baptism. Pray thou unceasingly for them now, O Stephen.

Desiring neither glory nor riches, O holy hierarch, thou didst seek the spiritual ability to guide many by thy desire and to lead them to Christ; and this thou didst receive. Wherefore, cease thou never to entreat Christ God, that He save all who honor thy precious memory.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Come ye, and, assembling now with piety, O newly enlightened councils of the sanctified, rendering fitting honor with psalms and praises to our father and benefactor, who hath spiritually begotten us through baptism unto regeneration, and hath led us from the darkness into the light, let us cry out, saying: O Lord, through the supplications of Stephen Thy favored one, save and have pity on all who piously hymn Thee with all their soul!

Now & ever…, from the Pentecostarion.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the first canon of the saint, and 4 from Ode VI of the second canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318

\[Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\]

Brethren: Such a high priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Reading from the Gospel according to St.Matthew, § 24 \[Mt. 7: 24-8: 4\]

The Lord said: “Whosoever heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.” And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at His doctrine: For He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. When He was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed Him. And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying: “Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” And Jesus put forth His hand, and touched him, saying: “I will; be thou clean.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus saith unto him: “See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

