The 26th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Basil,

Bishop of Amasea

for this day we provide also the service in honor of St. Stephen of Perm

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Made steadfast by the law of God, O blessed and glorious one, thou didst achieve control over all the passions, and having manifestly made thy mind the ruler thereof and become a divine intercessor, thou didst receive holy anointing as is meet, and wast a guide for the reason-endowed flock, O adornment of hierarchs and martyrs.

The iniquitous emperor separated thee from thy flock like a sheep, O all-blessed Basil, for thou didst preach Christ God, our King, Who was slaughtered like a lamb; and he unjustly slew thee and commanded that thou be cast into the sea, thus obtaining for thee the kingdom of heaven and everlasting glory.

Thou didst all-gloriously set the steps of thy feet in the waters, O glorious Basil; for thy body, cast forth after thine end, as thou didst foretell, mightily traversed it, and thou didst honorably entrust the burden thereof to thy city of Amasea, to be for it an unashamed advocate, a river of healings, and the cleansing of divers ailments.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

O thou who contained in thy womb the infinite God Who, in His love for mankind, became a man and, receiving our substance from thee, manifestly deified it: disdain me not, who am now filled with sorrow, O most pure one, but quickly take pity and free me from the various enmity of the wicked foe.

Stavrotheotokion—

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and cried out to Thee maternally: “O my Son most beloved, how it is that Thou hast been suspended upon the tree of the Cross? ­O Long‑suffering Word, how is it that thy hands and feet have been pierced with nails? How is it Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

AT MATINS

Canon of the hieromartyr, with 4 troparia, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

By thy supplications, O glorious one, grant wisdom and discourse of understanding unto me who long to hymn thee and to praise thy divine struggles, for the sake of the love of Christ which thou didst mightily show forth.

Having been anointed with the chrism of grace, thou didst show thyself to be a holy hierarch, O sacred one, worthily offering up to Christ unbloody sacrifices, and thyself as a pure sacrifice through martyrdom.

Arrayed in a purple robe through the victory of thy sufferings, and adorned with a crown of blood, thou wast shown to have achieved control over the passions, O holy hierarch; and having driven falsehood away, thou reignest with Christ.

*Theotokion:* He Who of old created man on earth was incarnate in thy womb and became perfect man. Wherefore, we know Him to be perfect in two essences, O all-immaculate Theotokos.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst bring thyself to Christ as an unblemished sacrifice, O wise one, wholly consumed by the fire of thy conscience and by suffering. *Twice*

With discourse of wisdom did Christ establish thee unshakably as upon a foundation of rock, O glorious Basil, and He hath raised thee up as a wise pastor.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O all-pure one, hath the race of mortals truly been released from the ancient curse. Wherefore, we honor the likeness of thy divine countenance, O Mistress.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Enlightened by the divine Spirit, with pastoral boldness and high wisdom thou didst put the pride of the tyrant to shame; and having traversed the abyss of falsehood, thou didst attain unto the divine harbor. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, who hast surpassed the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications cleanse me, who am dust, and am defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, granting me great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou dost suffer willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God — the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin — the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

With the staff of thy teachings, O wise and all-blessed Basil, thou didst guide the flock of Christ by the living water of the divine well-springs and the pasturage of grace.

With divinely wise words thou didst right boldly denounce the mindlessness of the iniquitous and infamous Lycinius, which was abominable to God, O martyr of Christ, and thou wast crowned with the trophy of honor.

Thou didst lay an immovable foundation upon the rock of Faith, O wise hieromartyr, and didst mightily endure the threefold waves of the falsehood of idolatry, destroying it with the power of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Mother of God, heal thou the broken state of human nature, in that thou gavest birth to the unoriginate Word in two inseparable natures, the likeness of Whose flesh we venerate.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Strengthened by Christ, O glorious and holy hierarch, thou didst denounce the falsehood of idolatry, and thou didst mock the high priest thereof as a filthy bird, O wise martyr, mightily finishing the race of faith. *Twice*

Like another Moses, thou didst manifestly part the sea of impiety with the staff of the Faith, O all-blessed Basil, and didst lead the new Israel to the promised land, to the light of divine knowledge.

*Theotokion:* Possessing the divine likeness of thy countenance for exemplary veneration, O pure and all-immaculate Theotokos, rendered brilliant by thine entreaties and help, with reason we all ever drive away the assembly of the heretics.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

The devil, the cruel and iniquitous tyrant, was unable to endure the boldness of thy words, O glorious martyr, and he wickedly set Lycinius against thee. *Twice*

Thinking to soften thy firmness and boldness with blandishments, O holy martyr, the malicious tyrant was disappointed in his expectation, being mightily trampled beneath thy feet.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving was Eve delivered from her pangs, O Theotokos; for thou gavest birth to the Deliverer of the human race, O all-pure Mistress, our sole adornment.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Having spurned the imperial edict, O Basil, thou didst receive the kingdom of heaven; and joining the chorus therein, be thou mindful of us who honor thy memory, O hieromartyr.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

The prideful enemy, who boasted greatly that he would destroy the earth as though it were the nest of a bird, was mightily vanquished by thine opposition, and manifestly fell headlong beneath thy sacred feet, O hieromartyr.

Thou didst manifestly dispel the gloom of idolatry with the light of the Faith, O wise and blessed one, chanting praises to Christ, as the children did of old: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Neither blandishments nor threats in anywise softened the firmness and strength of thy soul, O glorious hierarch Basil, and, unwounded, thou didst bear trials as though they were flowers.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst transcend the laws of birthgiving, O pure one, having manifestly given birth to the Author of all creation. Wherefore, O most hymned one, we, the faithful, now most piously confess thee to be the true Theotokos.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having felled deception beneath thy feet with arrows of wisdom, O all-blessed hierarch, thou wast crowned by the divine Spirit with wreaths of victory as an all-glorious champion of the Faith, crying: Hymn ye the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst sever the neck of falsehood with the sword of faith when thy head was cut off, O glorious one, and thou hast received from Christ the crown of victory, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy body was broken, and thy head was all-gloriously cut off, O blessed one; and by the guidance of the Spirit of God thou wast brought across the immeasurable abyss. And now, dancing with the angels, thou dost glorify the Father, the Son and the divine Spirit.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving thou didst cut off the venom of the serpent who poisoned Eve, O all-pure one, having given birth to the hypostatic Word in the flesh, awesomely uniting the hypostatic Word of the Father to thy womb. And we venerate the likeness of His flesh.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Manifestly hastening to harbor, O all-glorious one, thou didst traverse the threefold waves of the storm of idolatry by the guidance of the Spirit; and as thou joinest chorus with the hosts on high, O blessed one, be thou mindful of those who honor thee. *Twice*

Divinely joining chorus with the angels to dance in victory before the throne of the God and Master of all, O glorious Basil, rejoicing thou dost merciful watch over us who hymn thee, as a pastor and hierarch.

*Theotokion:* In seedlessly giving birth to the unoriginate Son and Word of God, O Virgin Mother, thou hast restored our whole nature which had grown old through the transgression of disobedience. Wherefore, we magnify thee unceasingly, O Mistress.

