The 27th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Hieromartyr Symeon,

the Kinsman of Christ

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 3 for the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

O Symeon, thou didst show thyself to be a most sacred priest, a lawful athlete, a true kinsman of the Creator, a right marvellous wonderworker, an all-radiant beacon, a guide for the lost, an immovable pillar of the honored Church, an heir of the heavenly kingdom, and a peer of the angels.

Through bodily pangs, through all manner of most painful torment, and manifold struggles thou didst draw nigh unto the cross, emulating Christ Who was crucified of His own will, O all-glorious hierarch. Wherefore, rejoicing and celebrating thy holy memory, O Symeon, we receive release from our offenses through thy supplications.

In sacred manner hast thou entered the celestial Church, stained with blood in hallowed manner, O blessed one; and thou standest before the Trinity, shining richly with the effulgence emitted therefrom, O thou who art most rich. Wherefore, O Symeon, celebrating today thy radiant memorial, we illumine the senses of our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion—

With outpourings of the all-holy Spirit, bedew thou my thoughts, O all-pure one who gavest birth to Christ, the Dew-drop Who by His compassions doth infinitely wash away the countless iniquities of men; and by thy supplications ever vouchsafe unto me a torrent of living sustenance.

Stavrotheotokion—

When the ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, she marvelled and cried out: “What is this new sight, O my Son most desired? How hath the unbelieving and iniquitous assembly rewarded Thee who benefited by Thy many miracles? Glory to Thine ineffable condescension, O Master!”

Troparion, in Tone I—

In sacred manner do we praise thee, O sacred hierarch Symeon, as the kinsman of Christ and a steadfast martyr who destroyed deception and kept the Faith. Wherefore, celebrating today thy most holy memory, we ­receive remission of sins through thy supplications.

AT MATINS

Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the hieromartyr, with 6 troparia, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

O sacred Symeon, standing, crowned, before the Master, ask thou remission of offenses for those who with love keep thy most sacred memory.

Fitted with the Cross as a mast, O most glorious hierarch, thou didst truly sail through the storm of deception, propelled by the waters of the Spirit.

With divine chrism did Christ, Who sprang forth from the tribe of Judah, anoint thee a priest for the people, O sacred Symeon, conversor with the angels.

*Theotokion:* In that thou wast above all creation, O Virgin, thou didst conceive in thy womb the Creator and God of all and gavest birth to Him for the salvation of men.

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Wholly deified at the behest of God, O sacred Symeon, thou becamest radiant, ­shining with the effulgence of martyrdom.

Thou didst shine forth the dawn upon those in darkness, showing forth the Sun of righteousness Who shone forth upon men from the cloud who is the Virgin Maiden.

Thou didst despise the pleasures of the world, O father, becamest the magnificent adornment of hierarchs, and wast vouchsafed heavenly glory by thy suffering.

*Theotokion:* All the rules of praises are annulled in thee, O most immaculate Theotokos; for through thee did God become man for our sake, as we know.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Church, having acquired the divinely eloquent Symeon as a great star, is enlightened, crying aloud: Rejoice, O honored leader of martyrs! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion—

Stretching forth thine all-pure hands, O Virgin Mother, cover those who trust in thee and cry to thy Son: Bestow Thy mercies upon all, O Christ!

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding thy Son uplifted upon the Tree, O all-pure one, thou didst cry out in grief, thy maternal womb rent with pain: “Woe is me! How hast Thou set, O my timeless Light?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Performing the sacred rites, offering unbloody sacrifice to Him Who was sacrificed for thee, thou wast slaughtered like a lamb. And thou didst bring thyself to Him, O divinely wise one who art most rich.

The mountains of ungodliness were reduced to dust in thy presence, O holy hierarch, and all the hills of the demons melted away when Christ strengthened thee.

O all-blessed one who possessed a most exalted life, thou wast lifted up upon a tree, in accordance with thy desire, emulating the suffering of God Who hath raised up the world.

*Theotokion:* Foreseeing thy birthgiving, O all-pure one, Habbakuk described thee beforehand as a mountain overshadowed, from whence our one God would come forth.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Of thine own will, O blessed one, didst thou commit thyself to be wholly consumed by the fire of martyrdom, and thou wast mystically preserved as a sweet savor, O blessed Symeon.

Thou didst fervently commit thyself to suffer like an innocent lamb, emulating Christ Who suffered in the flesh for our sake and hath done away with the passions.

As a temple of the divine Spirit, O all-wise one, by the power of thy prayers thou didst cast down temples of the idols and didst guide the lost to the Light.

*Theotokion:* In our behalf, O all-pure Maiden, entreat Christ Who clothed Himself in material flesh through thy pure blood, and hath restored men.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Thou wast instructed most gloriously by the divine Effulgence Who guided thee toward life divine, O thou who art most rich, and thou hast been shown to be full of ineffable understanding, O holy hierarch.

The Church of God rejoiceth, having thee, O Symeon, as another river issuing forth from Eden, full of the life-giving waters of the Spirit.

Thou didst sit upon thy lofty throne as a successor to James and one who shared in his ways, illumining thine episcopacy with martyrdom, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God, heal thou the incurable sufferings of my soul, in that thou hast given birth for men unto Christ Who hath healed our sufferings by His own passion.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Today, the Church, possessing the divinely eloquent Symeon as an exceeding great star, shineth, crying aloud: Rejoice, O honored crown of martyrs!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ardently surrendering thy body to torture for Christ, thou wast not daunted, neither didst thou weaken, O wondrous one, crying aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Afire with divine love, O all-blessed one, in mind thou wast stronger than material fire, crying out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou wast lifted up upon a cross like the Master, O father, adorned with a comparable manner of suffering; and thou chantest in gladness: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Maiden, Mother of God, thou wounding of the demons, goodly adornment of the angels and salvation of men: deliver my lowly soul from the deception of the enemy.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Christ our God, Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh and revealed it to us as a sword of salvation, O ye children, exalt ­supremely forever!

Receiving all the splendor of the Comforter in thy pure heart, O Symeon, thou didst destroy the lightless darkness of the demons, illumining the faithful.

Having dried up the sea of grievous heresy with the streams of thy divine doctrines, thou hast watered every soul which produceth the grain of faith.

Thou wast shown to be a priest, O martyr, entering the temple of God with thy blood, where thou dost ever gaze upon the unblemished Lamb Who was slaughtered for thy sake.

*Theotokion:* That our race may hymn thee who art magnified with voices of thanksgiving, O Bride of God, protect and preserve us from all harm.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou wast shown to be a pillar of fire, O all-blessed one, leading a new people out of Egyptian falsehood; and thou didst bring them across to the land of divine promise, O most honored hieromartyr.

Thou didst have the dual names of Simon and Symeon, having theologized before the ungodly concerning the Word Who is of two natures, thus drawing nigh unto thy cross. Wherefore, assembling, we all call thee blessed.

Today the Church doth celebrate the memorial of thy feast, O Symeon, prayerfully honoring thee with the divine James whose cathedra thou didst receive, O sacred one.

*Theotokion:* With divine light illumine me as a habitation of light, O Virgin, dispelling the darkness of my passions and the profound night of pleasures, O all-pure Theotokos.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 131

\[I Cor. 4: 9-16\]

Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Matthew, §56 \[13: 54-8\]

At that time, Jesus came into His own country, and taught the people in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astounded, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joses and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence hath this man all these things? And they were offended in him, But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

