The 28th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the Holy Apostles Jason & Sosipater

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs

Dada, Maximus & Quintilian

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord…”—

The blessed Jason, the stream of salvation flowing forth upon the fulness of the earth, watered the hearts of men beset by the burning of evils and bedewed them with faith; wherefore, since his end he hath been called blessed. By his supplications, O Lord, bestow great mercy upon all.

The divinely inspired Jason became a ladder reaching to the heavens, leading the faithful up to the heavenly life by his teaching; and the glorious one liveth even after his death, and standeth, rejoicing, before the Trinity. By his supplications, O Lord, bestow great mercy upon all.

Jason all-rich ever poureth forth healings upon those who approach his shrine, causeth the infirmities of their souls to cease, driveth away the spirits of falsehood, and stilleth tempests. By his supplications, O Lord, bestow great mercy upon all.

And 3 stichera of the martyrs, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

Having confessed the uncreated Trinity before the tribunal, O ye three holy martyrs, ye were slain, and have now been vouchsafed life which groweth not old and have inherited a torrent of sustenance. Wherefore, pray ye, that the Trinity grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

O invincible martyrs who shed your blood in torrents, ye have dried up the flow of falsehood, ye pour forth showers of healings upon all who have recourse to you with faith, and ye take away the power of infirmities. Wherefore, pray ye, that the Trinity grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

With hymns, O ye faithful, let us all honor today the godly Dada, Maximus and Quintilian, the steadfast warriors, the all-wise martyrs, who are inhabitants of paradise, and now make supplication, that God grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

O most hymned Mistress, thou hope and confirmation of the faithful, our refuge and help, we beseech thee: from every misfortune preserve thy servants who with faith worship thine Offspring. Him do thou entreat, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb and Mistress, when she beheld her Lamb upon the Cross, bereft of beauty and comeliness, said, lamenting: “Woe is me! Whither hath Thy beauty gone, O Thou Who art most sweet? Where is Thy majesty? Where the radiant grace of Thine image, O my Son most beloved?”

Troparion of the apostles, in Tone III—

O holy apostles, entreat the merciful God, that =He= grant unto our souls remission of transgressions.

AT MATINS

Ode I

Canon of the Apostle Jason, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Dwelling with the angelic choirs, ever full of never-waning light, and deified by true communion, O thou who art most rich, illumine those who with love celebrate thy holy memory and chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hath He been glorified!

Ardent divine desire all but consumed thee, O Jason; wherefore, thou didst follow Him Who came to cast fire down to the ground, O glorious one, and, illumined by Him, thou didst cry out in splendor: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Emulating the immaterial intelligences in character, O blessed one, thou didst serve Him Who mercifully manifested Himself on earth for our sake in the matter of a body; and thou wast His sacred minister, crying: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

*Theotokion:* The Incomprehensible One Who became visible, incarnate of the Virgin who knew not man in His great loving-kindness, through the suffering of His flesh hath manifestly led up to dispassion those wretchedly brought low by the passions of the flesh. To Him let us sing as is our wont: For gloriously hath He been glorified!

Canon of the martyrs, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Ever standing with boldness before God Almighty, O martyrs, pray ye, that He send us cleansing of offenses.

Having finished the fight and vanquished the greatly crafty enemy, O martyrs, ye were crowned with divine beauty. Wherefore, in joy we ever glorify thee with hymns.

By the strength of the all-holy Spirit ye destroyed the lying serpent, O ye who are blessed of God, and ye now enjoy the gifts of immortality.

*Theotokion:* In His loving-kindness He Who is full emptied Himself and became flesh, leading up to our primal beauty us who with faith praise thee on earth, O pure one.

Ode III

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou wast shown to be the harp of the Spirit, sounding forth for us divinely beauteous teachings, interrupting the songs of the most wicked.

Like a river thy tongue hath poured forth springs of life and dried up the bitter waters of falsehood, O glorious one.

Through the activity and grace of the Holy Spirit do thy sacred relics pour forth divers healings, O wise one.

*Theotokion:* By thy life-imparting entreaty, O all-pure one who gavest birth to Life, slay thou the sin which dwelleth in me.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

Having been forcibly made prisoners for Christ, ye broke the evil bonds of falsehood with grace, and having been sundered from the flesh, ye have passed over to life.

Desiring to behold the beauty of God, O all-lauded athletes, adorned with steadfastness of mind ye endured wounds, chains and a violent death.

Suffering lawfully with strength of character, O all-lauded martyrs, together ye were arrayed in a crown of victory, and ye stand now in joy before the worshipful Trinity.

*Theotokion:* He Who by nature is uncircumscribable, becoming incarnate through thee is circumscribed, O divinely joyous and pure one. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He take pity and save those who hymn thee.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

With the brilliantly radiant beams of thine honored discourses thou didst illumine all in godly manner, O Apostle Jason, and didst drive away the darkness; and having suffered, O blessed one, thou pourest forth healings and dost cause the cruel pangs of our bodies to cease. Wherefore, assembling, we all celebrate thy holy festival, glorifying the Savior, and we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Having drawn nigh to pain with steadfastness of soul, ye showed yourselves to be unconquered by the manifold wiles of the deceiver, O martyrs, ye peers of the angels. Wherefore, the whole world honoreth your struggles and honored sufferings, whereby ye have been glorified.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high unceasingly entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd hanging, dead, upon the Tree, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “How can I bear Thy condescension which is past recounting, O my Son, and Thy voluntary sufferings, O all-good God?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Thou wast a disciple of Paul, the all-wise preacher of sanctity, and wast an emulator of Christ, O glorious one, submitting to His divine behest.

Thou wast adorned with the vesture of the bridal-chamber of the divine Church, O God-bearer, having betrothed thyself thereto with the sweet words of thy wisdom.

With thy divine hands which dispelled evils thou wast a most skilled physician of the infirm, healing most grievous sufferings.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress who knewest not wedlock and gavest birth to the Word, save me and free me from misfortunes and eternal damnation.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thee, O Lord, and I was afraid; I have understood thy works, the prophet said, and have glorified Thy power.

Confirming the divine law, the athletes spurned the iniquity of the ungodly, suffering piously and pleasing the Lord.

Let us bless today the valiant Dada and Maximus, who suffered lawfully, and let us crown the most honored Quintilian with praises.

Remaining unmoved during your suffering, O saints, ye cast down all falsehood and have received a crown of victory from Christ God.

*Theotokion:* Raise me up who am beset by despondency, O Theotokos, that I may do the will of God, and that I may bless thee, O tireless intercessor for all.

Ode V

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Going before me with the light of Thy knowledge, O Lord, out of the night of ignorance to the path of Thy commandments do Thou lead me, who ever stray toward the soul-destroying way.

With divine teachings thou didst free men stuck fast in falsehood and mindlessly and perniciously enslaved, O all-blessed one.

Standing forth like a beacon on the heights of divine knowledge, O Jason, thou hast drawn to the divine harbor those who are grievously drowning.

With thy vivifying discourse, O blessed one, thou gavest life to those slain of old by the sting of the serpent, astonishing them.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more holy than the cherubim, having given flesh on earth to the Master of all, O most immaculate and pure Mistress.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light upon us who rise early unto the judgments of Thy commandments, O Master Christ our God, Who lovest mankind.

Confessing the divine and saving name before the tyrants, O holy ones, ye endured the trial of many tortures and an unjust death.

Strengthened by the grace of the divine Spirit, ye were not afraid of bodily tortures, nor did ye render worship to graven images, O right victorious martyrs.

Having received an imperishable crown, O ye three holy martyrs, ye stand now before the Trinity, having been vouchsafed never-waning effulgence, and are now called blessed.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the incurable passions of my heart, O most immaculate Mistress, I pray thee, and dispel the grievous darkness of my mind, O all-pure one.

Ode VI

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the uttermost abyss, O Christ God, in that Thou lovest mankind deliver me from my sins, and direct my life, I beseech Thee.

Amazed by the beauty of Him Who hath drawn nigh unto us in His loving-kindness, O Apostle Jason, thou didst follow after Him and didst forsake the beauty of life.

Studying things divine, O glorious one, by grace thou didst teach the effulgence of the Trinity to those afflicted of old with blindness and the mindlessness of ignorance.

Dispelling divers ailments and expelling evil spirits, thou didst turn the people to the knowledge of the Lord, delivering them from the deception of the evil one.

*Theotokion:* The Word of salvation descended into thy womb like dew upon the fleece and became man through thee, O Maiden, saving me by thy mediation.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Lead up my life from corruption as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, I cry to Thee, O Christ God Who lovest mankind, for with Thee is life, incorruption and power.

Seen as newly revealed stars, O most lauded martyrs, ye enlighten the whole earth, dispelling the gloom of ungodliness with grace.

Having utterly rejected the laws of the ungodly, and been manifestly confirmed by the law of the Lord, O holy martyrs, ye suffered lawfully for Christ.

Shown forth well by your exalted understanding and deeds, O all-praised ones, him who fell headlong from on high did ye subdue beneath your feet, which were adorned with the beauty of martyrdom.

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending the laws of nature and past understanding, O most immaculate Maiden, thou gavest flesh to the Creator of nature. And, confessing Him, the right victorious martyrs suffered.

Kontakion of the apostles, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Ye were shown to be like all-radiant stars, illumining the whole world with the light of your preaching, O divine Apostles Jason and Sosipater. Save those who honor you with faith.

Ode VII

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, but, bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, they chanted a hymn, saying: O supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having approached constant pain, O Jason, thou hast eased the pangs of the faithful and hast guided to painless acceptance those who piously chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou didst cause the corruption of evil to cease, O blessed one, and didst plant the understanding of salvation in the minds of men; and enlightened thereby thou didst cry out to the Master of all: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Bearing Christ in thine arms, as thou wert a throne of fire, O most immaculate one, entreat Him as thy Son and Lord, that He grant peace to the world which crieth: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Setting your souls aflame with the fire of divine fear, O wise ones, ye utterly consumed all the bitter tinder of polytheism, and have been taken up to the never-setting radiance, granting us remission of our offenses.

Having truly extinguished the conflagration of polytheism with the streams of your blood, O blessed ones, ye pour forth a shower of miracles upon us who with faith ever have recourse to the shrine of your relics.

Having shown yourselves to be the dwelling-place of the Spirit, O wise and right victorious martyrs, the temple wherein ye now lie doth put forth a well-spring of miracles; and fleeing to it, we are delivered from all the defilement of the passions.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate Theotokos, thou gavest birth for us to the incarnate Word Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit. Him do thou beseech, that He save from all sufferings and evil circumstances those who hymn thee.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Trampling down the fire and flame in the furnace, the divinely eloquent youths did chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst uproot the thorns of blasphemy with the seed of the Word, O Jason, and didst cultivate a multitude of the saved as grain an hundredfold.

Him before Whose throne thou standest in holiness and sanctity appointed thee a luminary for Tarsus, for the enlightenment of those in darkness, O Apostle Jason.

Thou wast an instructor of the law for those who had been made subject to vain falsehood, and thou didst save those who offered worship to created things, teaching them to worship the uncreated God alone.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to God the Word, O Maiden, heal thou the passions of our flesh and soul, that we may all glorify thee with faith and love.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Loving the Lord with all your soul, ye were slain like lambs for the noetic Shepherd, and were offered up on the divine altar; and ye dwell in the mansions of the firstborn.

With faith let us honor Quintilian, Dada and Maximus, the martyrs of Christ, the divine stars illumining the hearts of all with rays of miracles.

By your discourse ye overcame the ungodly and the impious, and, rejoicing, ye suffered, O martyrs of Christ; and ye have been numbered among the divine passion-bearers from all ages, and with them are ever honored.

*Theotokion:* Like a fiery throne thou didst bear Christ Who mingled with us in the coarseness of the flesh. Him do thou beseech, O pure Theotokos, that He take pity and save those who honor thee with love.

Ode IX

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Thou didst transcend the laws of nature, conceiving the Creator and Lord, and didst become a portal of salvation for the world. Wherefore, we magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Let us all form sacred choirs, blessing in sanctity Jason, the great apostle of Christ who ever rejoiceth with the incorporeal choirs.

Creation leapeth up, dancing now on thine honored festival, O glorious Jason, and the apostles, prophets and all the martyrs rejoice. With them we magnify thee with faith.

The shrine where thy patient and much suffering body lieth doth ever emit rays which disperse the darkness of pain, O all-blessed Jason.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, thou hast been shown to be the Mother of Emmanuel, Who became incarnate of thy womb and hath deified human nature. Wherefore, O all-holy Theotokos, we call thee blessed.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

Following the passion of the Dispassionate One, O passion-bearers, together ye underwent the testing of most subtle tortures and have inherited life through death, abiding unto ages of ages. Wherefore, ye are ever blessed.

Having come to a beautiful knowledge of and trodden well the paths of martyrdom to the ways which lead to places of noetic rest, O glorious martyrs, ye received your end by the sword, and ever dance with the angels.

Let us stand in the temple of the Lord and bless Dada, Maximus and Quintilian, the valiant warriors who have destroyed the enemy, and let us cry out with faith: O Thou Who lovest mankind, by their supplications deliver us all from perils of great confusion.

Like the sun doth your sacred memory radiantly illumine creation, O all-glorious victors. By your sacred mediation deliver us who celebrate it from the darkness of the passions, we pray, O athletes of God the Savior.

*Theotokion:* As a lover of sin I fall down in repentance before thy compassions, O God, and cry out with faith: Through the entreaties of her who bore Thee in purity on earth, take pity on me and deliver me from everlasting torments, O all-good Christ.

