The 29th Day of the MONTH OF APRIL

Commemoration of the 9 Holy Martyrs of Cyzicus

Commemoration of the Venerable

Memnon the Wonder-worker

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O all-praised martyrs of Christ, when once the mindlessness of the Greeks held sway and drew all into the pit of iniquity, ye did not leave the straight path and did not join yourselves to ungodliness, but suffered with valor of character and, slain by the sword, have inherited life.

Celebrating with gladness their sacred memory, with faith let us honor and with hymns let us bless Theognes, Rufus and Antipater, Theostichus and Artemas, Magnus and Theodotus, the glorious Thaumasius and the godly Philemon, who shone forth splendidly in their sufferings and have enlightened those in darkness.

O beautiful flowers of the martyrs, ye sacred legion, company assembled by God, excellent congregation, divinely chosen assembly, holy choir, blessed council, who struggled for the Trinity: entreat the Trinity, beseech the Trinity for us, that we may receive remission of sins.

And 3 stichera of the venerable one, in the same tone & melody—

O blessed and venerable Memnon, having first purified thy soul by ascetic labor, thou becamest the pure and beautiful abode of the Spirit; wherefore, thou dost expel evil spirits and ever healest the infirmities of those who have recourse to thee. Pray thou to Christ in behalf of us who praise thee.

O glorious and venerable Memnon, having gained control over the passions of thy soul, thou didst train a legion of monks, zealously anointing them for labors of asceticism, and thou didst present them before the Word Who seeth all things; and having lived a blessed life and been unsullied by defilements, with them be thou ever mindful of us who praise thee.

O venerable Memnon who art most rich, of old thou didst cause a spring of water to pour forth, unto the praise of the Lord and for the preservation of souls. Thou hast saved ships from the depths of the sea, by thy supplications hast preserved men from a plague of locusts, and dost ever work countless miracles. Pray thou to Christ in behalf of us who praise thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

The preëternal God, receiving flesh from thy blood, showed thee to be an intercessor for men, O pure one. Wherefore, deliver thy servants from every misfortune and evil circumstance and from the snares of the wicked enemy, and vouchsafe that all who glorify and do thee homage may partake of the effulgence of the elect.

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, O Master Jesus, Thy Virgin Mother cried aloud: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that thou dost unjustly endure wounds, O Physician Who hast healed the infirmity of men and hast delivered all from corruption in Thy loving-kindness?”

AT MATINS

Ode I

Canon of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Delighting together in divine beauty, partaking abundantly of a torrent of sustenance, and deified by communion, O crown-bearing martyrs, from cruel misfortunes deliver those who call you blessed.

Having shone forth like rays of the sun, O athletes, with the beams of your steadfast struggles ye enlighten all with the effulgence of miracles, dispel the night of the passions and drive away the gloom of the demons.

Having been slain on earth with painful wounds, ye have passed over together to the life devoid of pain, O youths who suffered greatly; wherefore, ye pour forth healings, easing all pain by your God-pleasing supplications, O ye who are all-rich.

*Theotokion:* Through thy precious blood thou gavest birth to God, Who became incarnate in manner past understanding and assumed an appearance like unto ours, O all-immaculate Mother. Wherefore, all of us, the generations of generations, call thee blessed, thou confirmation of the holy martyrs.

Canon of the venerable one, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Shining with the divine grace of the all-holy Spirit, O life-bearing Memnon, by thy radiant supplication purge the gloom of the passions from those who celebrate thine honored repose.

O venerable one, taking up thy cross, thou didst follow after the Word Who was crucified for our sake, and by abstinence and lying on the ground thou didst mortify the movements of the flesh, O venerable one.

Uniting thyself to God by fasting, prayers and tears, thou didst receive from Him the grace to heal infirmities and to expel evil spirits, O all-blessed and divinely wise Memnon.

*Theotokion:* Clothing Himself in man in His goodness, O pure and all-holy one, God issued forth from thee twofold in activity and nature. Him do thou ever beseech, that He enlighten those who hymn thee.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

In nowise consenting to sacrifice to lifeless graven images, ye offered yourselves as living sacrifices to Him Who was sacrificed for our sake, O all-comely youths, O holy martyrs.

Strengthened by the power of the Spirit, with the divine laws ye cast down the counsels and pursuits of the iniquitous; and having suffered lawfully, ye have received glory.

Let those of great renown be praised: Artemas and Philemon, Theostichus and Magnus, the glorious Rufus, Antipater and Thaumasius, Theognes and Theodotus.

*Theotokion:* All the weaponry of the enemy hath now been made of no account, O most immaculate one who gavest birth to Christ Who was wounded by the spear, for Whom the martyrs, being wounded, did suffer.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

With the enlightenment of the virtues didst thou shine forth on the earth like the sun, O venerable one, illumining the souls of all with the grace of the Spirit.

Thy loins girded, clothed in dispassions, O venerable Memnon, thou didst manifestly wield thy staff for the mortification of the passions.

Having been compassionate to the poor, O venerable one, thou didst receive from God the great grace to heal incurable suffering.

*Theotokion:* The Word of God made His abode within thine undefiled womb, O all-pure one, and hath taken all sin away from mortals.

Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

The radiant choir of sacred athletes, the beautiful company, the divinely assembled council, the band ten in number, having suffered mightily and trampled the tyranny of the enemy underfoot, have been numbered with the choirs of the angels and stand before the Lord.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

We all praise thee, O blessed one, as a radiant star illumining the world with virtues and rays of miracles; for thou wast a partaker of divine radiance, O Memnon, and hast passed over to the never-waning effulgence. Wherefore, we ever honor thy luminous and holy memory, glorifying the Savior, and we cry out to thee with faith: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having fallen into the most subtle temptations of enemies, visible and invisible, stuck fast in the tempest of my countless offenses I flee to the haven of thy goodness, O pure one, as to my fervent assistance and protection. Wherefore, O all-pure one, do thou earnestly entreat Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, in behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly pray to thee, O all-pure Theotokos, ever beseeching Him to grant remission of our offenses unto us who hymn thy glory as is meet.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of transgressions unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Unto Him Who of His own will was sacrificed and hath slain death did ye offer yourselves as wholeburnt offerings, divinely slain victims, a perfect holocaust and acceptable sacrifices, O athletes. Wherefore, we call you blessed.

Showing forth a great miracle, O athletes, ye straightened bent arms and delivered from dropsy a prominent man who had recourse with love to your shrine, O right wondrous ones.

As is meet let those who suffered be blessed: Artemas and Antipater, Theostichus and Rufus, Magnus, Philemon and Theognes, with the glorious Theodotus, for they cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* He Who sitteth ineffably in the bosom of the Father sitteth as a babe in thine embrace, O Virgin; and the right victorious youths, emulating His blessed passion, elected to die.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having purified thy heart with streams of tears, O venerable one, thou didst cause waters to flow forth in a waterless place, O Memnon, God glorifying thee as His favorite.

Shining forth like a star through thine all-glorious life, O blessed one, by thy sacred wonders thou wast shown to be another heaven for those who cry out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Submitting to the laws of the Master, O venerable one, as a shepherd thou didst guide those under thee to Him Who gave thee the talant which, as a dutiful servant, thou didst greatly increase.

*Theotokion:* My mind, which is drawn to the pleasures of the body, do thou make steadfast through thy mediation, I pray, O Theotokos who alone gavest birth to God, the Bestower of good things.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Setting fire to your minds like a noetic coal, ye truly consumed all the tinder of falsehood, O blessed ones, and quenched the conflagration of idolatry with the dew of faith.

Going forth to suffer for the indivisible Trinity, O athletes, it was as though ye were not separated into many bodies; wherefore, ye destroyed the whole legion of the devil.

He who with zeal went to your precious reliquaries and was freed from the legion of the evil one hymneth your wonders, O godly martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to us as one who delivereth those who hymn thee from misfortunes and corrupting transgressions, passions, sorrows and evil circumstances, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Thy mind fixing its pure gaze upon God, O blessed of God, thou wast shown to be above the pleasures of the flesh.

As a physician of bodies, O thou who art most rich, with the grace of the Spirit drive away the bestial passions of men’s souls.

Blessed art thou, and well is it with thee, O all-blessed one, for thou hast vanquished the malice of the enemy and mortified the passions.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to God, yet remained a Virgin, O Bride of God; wherefore, the whole tribe of man calleth thee blessed, rejoicing.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

The death of the divine athletes hath been shown to be precious in Thy sight, O God of all, and honoring them now, Thou hast revealed them as healing for the sick which is without cost.

Lifting up your hands and hearts to the highest with lofty intent and manly mind, O God-bearing martyrs, ye put down the assaults of the wicked one.

*Theotokion:* Thy womb was shown to be like a granary holding the Grain of immortality, Who feedeth the souls of all the faithful and enlighteneth the martyrs.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

At the mere utterance of thy name the locusts and all the malignancy of the demons are driven away, O Memnon, for thou wast known to be pleasing unto God, Who hath greatly glorified thee, O father.

Having vanquished the assault of carnal knowledge, thou didst receive the grace of the Spirit, to dispel infirmities and to heal souls sick with sin, O right wondrous one.

O the wonder! How at the mere invocation of thee, O all-glorious Memnon, are the faithful saved who sail the seas, beholding thee hastening to still the tumult of the waves?

*Theotokion:* Mortify the wisdom of my flesh, O Virgin, in that thou didst conceive the Slayer of death and Bestower of life and gavest birth to Him in manner past recounting and comprehension, O all-pure one.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

The steadfast and most splendid choir of the ten martyrs, who confessed the three-Sunned Godhead, cried out to Him at the tribunal: “O Master, we offer our blood, souls and bodies to Thee as an unblemished sacrifice! Number us among Thy heavenly choirs, in that thou art our merciful God!”

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Your labors ever pour forth divine streams of healings, O right wondrous martyrs, drying up rivers of pain and washing away all the defilement of the passions.

The athletes rejoiced with ineffable joy when they suffered, and, cut down by the sword, they chanted: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

O glorious athletes, ease for us the heavy weight of infirmities, the sufferings of our hearts, the pangs of our bodies and every sorrow which besetteth us.

*Theotokion:* Having been shown forth as the great might of all the martyrs, O pure Mother of God, thou hast shown thyself to be the help of men who ever hymn thee with sacred songs.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

With showers of tears thou didst extinguish the furnace of the passions, O blessed one, and now, with the fire of thy miracles and grace, thou dost truly consume the material bane of infirmities.

Thou didst love thy Creator with all thy heart, O blessed and wise Memnon; wherefore, thou didst stand aloof from the flesh and the world, crying: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Planted like a tree by the waters of abstinence, O father Memnon who art most rich, in due season thou didst produce the working of miracles as fruit in abundance.

Thou didst cause the damage wrought by the locusts to cease by thy divine commands, O wise Memnon, and didst halt the waters of the river, crying and saying: Blessed art Thou, O my God!

*Theotokion:* Deliver me from the tempest of innumerable offenses, O Maiden, thou only mighty help of the lowly and cleansing of transgressions. Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O passion-bearing martyrs, we offer joyous laudation unto Him Who hath given you as great helpers to us who cry: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!

Rooted well like branches on the rock of faith, the martyrs have brought forth the fruits of suffering for us who chant with faith: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!

O greatly renowned physicians of the passions, heal the suffering of my soul and, beseeching Christ our God, deliver me from Gehenna and the outermost darkness thereof.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to Christ the Bestower of life Who hath crowned the passion-bearing martyrs who suffered lawfully. Him do thou entreat, O Maiden, that He heal me who am vanquished by the law of sin.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst shine forth like the dawn, like a star, like the great sun, O divinely inspired Memnon, and hast illumined with grace the souls of those who have set thee forth as an excellent guide, a sacred teacher and a wondrous instructor, who dost cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

When thou didst acquire humble wisdom through the grace of the Spirit, O all-blessed one, thou didst deal a deep wound to the enemy who gave rise to death, casting his arrogant mind down to the earth and trampling his soul-corrupting snares ­underfoot.

Having lived a good life, O holy one, thou wast vouchsafed to behold the blessedness and everlasting delight of heaven and the splendors of the saints; and thou now criest out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The place which before was waterless and now is full of water proclaimeth thy faith in the Lord, O venerable one, and the grace of the miracles which thou didst perform, crying out to the Bestower of good things: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Vouchsafe visitation unto my lowly soul, which is afflicted with the weight of evils and is drowning, O Mistress full of the grace of God, and show it forth as utterly restored to health, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

“Lo! the gates of heaven have been opened for you who have suffered!” Christ said to the passion-bearers; “Enter in and, rejoicing, receive for your pangs everlasting rewards fit for those who have fought bravely!”

Ye were beautiful in the wounds of your bodies and emulated the angels; and now ye stand before the Beauty of all, ever rejoicing and manifestly adorned with the communion of beautiful things, O most honored ones.

Let us stand in the house of God, praising the sufferings of Antipater and Theostichus, Rufus and Philemon, and the wonders of the divine Thaumasius, Magnus and Artemas, and the invincibility of Theognes and Theodotus.

Today hath the festival of the saints shone forth salvation for us. And, celebrating it with supplication, let us cry out to them with faith: O radiant summit of the martyrs, illumine the hearts of us all!

*Theotokion:* Clothed by thee in the purple robe of the body, the King issued forth, all adorned, from thy womb: and He hath vanquished all enemies and given victory to the athletes, O only pure Ever-virgin.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Strengthened by the might of the Godhead, O divinely wise Memnon, thou wast able to overcome all the power of the enemy; wherefore, having received a crown as a victor, pray thou to Christ in our behalf.

Streams of healings pour forth from thy shrine as from a well-spring, O venerable one, and they wash away pain and defilement by the power of the divine Spirit and give drink to the minds of those who honor thee.

Today thy memorial doth enlighten every age and mind like the sun, O father Memnon, for thou didst do the works of the Light; and having now departed unto the never-waning Light, thou hast made thine abode with Him.

Thou wast taken up into the eternal mansions, and beholding God as is meet, thou hast been numbered among the flocks of the venerable, O blessed Memnon. With them be thou ever mindful of those who commemorate thee on earth.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, we joyously declare to thee the cry of the archangel: Rejoice, O annulment of the curse, glory of the venerable, boast of the martyrs, preaching of the prophets and salvation of men!

