**Month of April**
{{text_align=center}}

**The 29th Day**
{{text_align=center}}

**Commemoration of the Holy Hierarch Basil of Ostrog**
{{text_align=center}}

**At Little Vespers**
{{text_align=center}}

*On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone IV—*

Making the flock entrusted to thee steadfast, O all-praised and holy hierarch Basil, like a star of great radiance thou didst adorn it with the rays of the dogmas of Orthodoxy, and didst drive from it the darkness of heresy, O most honored one. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Pray thou, that those who honor thy memory may be delivered from misfortunes and tribulations. *Twice*

Today the memorial of Basil shineth forth in Ostrog, illumining the whole world like the all-radiant sun, filling the hearts of the faithful with light, and healing the painful ailments of those who have recourse to the shrine of his relics. Wherefore, glorifying his memory, let us earnestly kiss the relics of the holy hierarch, praying that he drive the darkness of heresies away from his flock by the power of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin.

With the staff of the commandments of Christ thou didst drive the noetic wolves away from the Church of Christ, O all-blessed Basil, and thou didst mightily encircle it with spiritual ramparts, and didst pass over, whole and unharmed, unto Christ Whom thou didst serve. Wherefore, O holy one, entreat the Lord, that He deliver from corruption and misfortunes those who with faith keep thy most honored memory.

*Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone II—*

Thy memorial, which we celebrate today, hath shone forth like the sun, O holy hierarch Basil, enlightening the noetic hearts of the faithful, and we call upon thee in supplication: Rejoice, O tree of chastity, who, that thy soul might not be enslaved, didst put on fitting abstinence as the shield of the Spirit! Rejoice, O shepherd and teacher of thy Christian people! Rejoice, adornment of the Church! O all-sanctified Basil, pray thou unto Christ, that He grant peace to the whole world and save our souls.

*Aposticha stichera, in Tone VI—*

O blessed Basil, falling down before thee, I pray: Have pity and enlighten my soul, O all-wise one, that in adoration I may lift up mine eyes unto the compassionate Bestower of light.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Roaring, the enemies who desire to do evil unto me seek my destruction. But deliver me, I pray thee, O divinely wise and holy hierarch, in that thou hast boldness before God, and save me from wicked men, O most blessed hierarch Basil.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

We, the faithful, have acquired thee as a calm haven, an unassailable rampart, a tower of confirmation and a portal of repentance; wherefore, falling down, we beseech thee, O father Basil: Protect us by thy supplications, in that thou art the wise guide and ally of our souls.

*Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone—*

The adversary roareth against thy flock, O all-pure one, and every day the wicked seek to devour it; but deliver it from all harm and rapacity, O Theotokos.

**At Great Vespers**
{{text_align=center}}

*After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.*

*On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside all…”—*

Possessed of divine anointing, thou wast shown to be a God-bearer wholly sanctified, O holy hierarch Basil, and one invested with the Holy Spirit; and continually entering the Holy of holies with radiance, illumined with divine splendors, thou didst partake of the grace of the Holy Mysteries. Wherefore, as a true hierarch, pray thou with boldness for our souls. *Twice*

Thy way of life was rendered luminous by beams of the virtues, and thereby thou didst instruct thy flock, driving the darkness away from it; wherefore, thou wast shown to be a brilliant sun, O all-blessed Basil, who hast made thine abode where shineth the never-setting Sun, and hast been revealed today as a child of the grace of the Holy Spirit. For this cause, O ever-memorable one, forget not those who cherish thine honored memory and bless thee with love.

Adorned with faith through thy yearning for God, O all-glorious one, thy mind revealed thee to be a divinely wise instructor, for thou didst mortify carnal desires, by grace didst transform what is corrupt into that which is incorruptible, and didst join the incorporeal beings, O father Basil, thou radiant lamp and advocate for the souls of those who honor thy holy memory with love.

*And 4 stichera in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—*

Revealed as a good shepherd of the Church of Christ, O blessed Basil, thou madest thine abode in Zakholmia; and when thou didst move from thence to Ostrog, thou didst lay waste to thy body by fasting, vigils and prayers, O God-bearer, being well-pleasing unto God, Who hath glorified thy holy relics, which cure the diseases of all who celebrate thy most glorious memory with faith and love. Wherefore, we entreat thee: By thy supplications deliver us also from all woes and evil circumstances. *Twice*

Thou wast truly shown to be a namesake of victory for the faithful people, defending them against perils, O father Basil; for, ever invoked, thou goest swiftly before those who flee beneath thy shelter, day and night saving the faithful from the evil wiles of the wicked one.

In latter days thou wast shown to be the bulwark of the Serbian land, O father Basil. Wherefore, come, O ye people, let us kiss the holy and wonderworking relics of our God-bearing father, which loose the bonds of sin, driving away evil spirits and freeing his faithful servants, for whom he prayeth to Christ God, that He deliver and save our souls.

Thou hast been a great helper and a fervent mediator before God for those who find themselves amid tribulations and misfortunes, O blessed Basil, sacred preacher of Christ to those who earth, who cry out with us to thee: By thy supplications save us from all evils, O father Basil.

*Glory…, in Tone VIII—*

With thy valiant deeds didst thou enlighten the hearts of the faithful, O father Basil; for who hath heard of thy boundless humility and doth not marvel at thy patience? Thou wast kind to the poor, giving help to those in need, and teaching the fear of God unto all; and hast now been crowned with an never-fading wreath, O father, praying in behalf of our souls.

*Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—*

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

*Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:*

A Reading from Proverbs
{{text_align=center}}

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs
{{text_align=center}}

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon
{{text_align=center}}

When the righteous man is praised, the people will rejoice; for the memorial thereof is immortal: because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Wherefore, O ye people, love wisdom, and ye shall live; desire it, and ye shall be instructed, for the beginning thereof is love and the keeping of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide mysteries from you. For it is He that leadeth unto wisdom, and directeth the wise, the Author of all understanding and workmanship. For wisdom, which accomplisheth all things, hath taught me: for in her is an understanding spirit, holy, the brightness of the everlasting Light and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh them friends of God, and prophets, and is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order of stars: being compared with the light, she is found before it. She delivered from pain those that attended upon her, and guided them in the right paths, and gave him knowledge of holy things; she kept him safe from those who lay in wait; in a sore conflict she gave him the victory: that all might know that godliness is stronger than all. But vice shall not prevail against wisdom, neither shall evil ever overcome wisdom, nor the wicked circumvent the judgment which accuseth them. For the ungodly said, reasoning with themselves, but not aright: “Let us oppress the righteous man, and let us not spare his holiness, nor feel shame before the gray hairs of the elderly. Let our strength be the law of judgment: therefore, let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not pleasing to us, and is contrary to our doings; he upbraideth us with our offending the law and denounceth our offenses against our teaching. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He hath become for us a reproof against our thoughts, and is grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as counterfeits. He abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness; he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see, therefore, if his words be true, and let us prove what shall happen in the end of him. Let us examine him with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his innocence. Let us condemn him with a shameful death: for by his own saying he shall be respected.” Such things did they imagine, and were deceived: for their own wickedness hath blinded them, and as for the mysteries of God, they knew them not, neither did they understand that Thou art the one God, Who hast power of life and death, Who savest in time of tribulation and deliverest from every evil. Thou art compassionate and merciful, granting grace to Thy saints, but resisting the proud with Thine upraised arm.

*At Litia, these stichera—*

*In Tone II:* The shrine of thy relics emitteth rays of light, O father Basil, imparting healing unto those who have recourse unto it, and freeing them from their ailments. Wherefore, be glad and exult, O Church of Ostrog and the lands surrounding it! For the splendid memorial of the blessed Basil hath shone forth, who ever prayeth for our souls.

O father Basil, after thy return from Mount Athos thou wast revealed to thy flock as a shepherd and teacher, guiding them to the true Faith; and, rejoicing, it glorifieth thy holy memory, which even after thy death showeth forth the radiance of thy life. And gazing upon it we cry out to thee with hymns of resonance divine: O God-bearing father, from the assaults of the enemy save our brethren who serve in Zakholmia and Skenderia!

*In Tone IV:* O father Basil, the shrine of thy relics proclaimeth the power of the grace of the most Holy Spirit, Who through relics showeth mercy to the faithful, protecting Ostrog, wherein He bestoweth the sweet fragrance of healing, showing thee to be like the apostles in the miracles whereby thou illuminest those afar off as though they were nigh, and dost all-gloriously deliver them from misfortunes. Wherefore, O divinely blessed one, free thou from grievous evils and barbarians all who bless and call upon thee with love.

Thou didst hasten to praise thy Lord and Master, O father Basil, who in latter days, to those who bear the Cross of Christ, wast revealed as a pastor and teacher full of the grace of God; wherefore, delighting now in good things, thou hast acquired boldness before God, to Whom do thou make entreaty in behalf of the souls of those who glorify thee.

Thine all-glorious manner of life hath unto the whole world shown thee to be wondrous, O God-bearing father: thou wast the adornment of the venerable, and, like the sun shedding its rays upon the earth, thou didst illumine the hearts of the faithful who celebrate thy holy memory, O most blessed Basil.

*Glory…, in Tone VI—*

Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with songs and praises let us hymn the adornment of hierarchs, the beauty of the fathers, the well-spring of miracles and helper of the faithful; and let us say: Rejoice, preserver of Zakholmia and Skenderia, unassailable tower and primate of Montenegro and Primoria! Rejoice, most radiant beacon who enlightenest the ends of the Serbian land with miracles! Rejoice, divine joy of the sorrowful and fervent intercessor for the oppressed! And now, O father Basil, pray thou for those who ever honor thy gladsome memory, protecting thy faithful Orthodox flock.

*Now & ever…: Theotokion, in Tone VIII—*

Rejoice, fulfillment of the law! Rejoice, temple of the Holy Trinity, O all-pure Bride! Rejoice, divine chariot of the King of all! Rejoice, thou who didst bear in thine arms the immaterial Fire, as with tongs, O new garden of paradise, unblemished dove, throne of the Most High, divine bower which the Holy Spirit overshadowed, O holy Maiden!

*Aposticha stichera, in Tone VIII—*

O holy father Basil, in that thou art a ray of noetic light, a lamp of the Church, the beauty of monastics, a model of the life of fasting, be thou a helper unto us, by thy supplications freeing our souls from the pernicious enemy.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Receiving great authority from God, O father Basil, thou drivest away multitudes of evil spirits, from their malice saving all who with faith and love have recourse to the shrine of thy relics.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

How can we fittingly hymn the great holy hierarch Basil, the divinely radiant lamp of honored intelligence, which doth illumine and enlighten the faithful flock with divine understanding, in that he is a confessor of the profundity of the mysteries of salvation? Wherefore, together let us all say unto him: Rejoice, O Basil, thou father of fathers!

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

Thou art a good shepherd and an ardent teacher, O holy hierarch Basil; and ever praising thee, we cry out: God hath adorned His Church with thee, and thy body, which remained in the ground for many years, hath been shown to thy people as incorrupt. Wherefore, never cease to pray for those who honor thy holy memory.

*Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—*

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting the cleansing of transgressions unto all; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we may all be saved.

*After the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone IV—*

From thy youth thou gavest thyself wholly to the Lord, abiding in prayer, labor and fasting, O God-bearer, and thou wast a model of virtue for thy flock; therefore, beholding thy goodly disposition, God appointed thee as a shepherd and valiant hierarch for His Church, and after thy repose kept thy holy body unharmed, O holy hierarch Basil. Wherefore, as thou hast boldness, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. *Twice*

*And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.*

**At Matins**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.*

*After the first chanting of the Psalter, these sessional hymns, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—*

As a minister of Christ, O most honored one, thou didst teach the people and enlighten them with divine baptism; and giving them understanding, thou didst instruct thy flock, O father Basil. Wherefore, we all call thee a preacher of the Truth. O favored one of Christ, pray thou that our souls may be saved.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

O pure, unwedded Virgin Theotokos, only intercessor and protection of the faithful, from misfortunes, tribulations and grievous circumstances deliver all who set their hope on thee, and by thy divine entreaties save our souls, O Maiden.

*After the second chanting of the Psalter, these sessional hymns, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled…”—*

Taking up thy cross from thy youth, thou didst piously follow after Christ, and by asceticism didst vanquish carnal-mindedness; and fleeing the world, thou gavest thyself over to the monastic life. Wherefore, O father, the Holy Spirit smote thee and set thee up upon a hierarchal throne, where thou didst magnify Christ the Master and His all-pure Mother with divers gifts and miracles, for which cause the shrine of thy relics hath been adorned, O holy hierarch Basil.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

O most immaculate Virgin who supernaturally gavest birth unto God: with the holy hierarch Basil unceasingly beseech Him to grant remission of transgressions and correction of life unto all of us who, as is meet, hymn thee with faith and love, O only most hymned one.

*Polyeleos, and this magnification—*

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Basil, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

*Selected Psalm verses—*

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice.*

*After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—*

Having tamed the passions through fasting and prayer, thou wast shown to be a great hierarch O father Basil, and didst all-gloriously shepherd thy flock, didst enlighten it with baptism and instruct it to glorify the one God in three Persons. They who with faith have recourse to the Holy Church and the shrine of thy relics do thou save by thy supplications unto God, that thou mayest grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Let us hymn the portal of heaven, the ark, the most holy mountain and most radiant cloud, the bush unburnt and noetic garden of paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of the universe, in whom was found the salvation of the world and the remission of the offenses of the people. Wherefore, let us also cry out to her: O Mother of God, entreat Christ God, that He save the souls of those who bow down before thine all-holy birthgiving.

*Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone IV—*

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Gospel according to John, § 36
{{text_align=center}}

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

*After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—*

O holy Basil, servant of Christ, heir of God, who hast a share in the blessed habitations: thy manner of life hath shone forth upon us in accordance with thy name; the brilliance of thine understanding and the innocence of thy soul were shown forth with thy gray hairs, and the meekness of thy discourse glorified thy holy way of life, which we, having assembled, magnify. And blessing thee on the day of thy repose, we pray: Help us to reach the place where thou abidest, O God-bearing Basil.

*Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclesis\], with 6 troparia, in Tone VIII, including the irmos; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia, in Tone VI—*

Ode I
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

As a holy hierarch and minister of God, thou didst take thy place with the choirs on high, O good shepherd of Zakholmia who tended well the flock entrusted to thee. Earnestly pray for us, O father Basil, that by thy supplications we may receive eternal good things.

Thou wast chosen by the Lord to serve His Holy Gospel with honor, O all-blessed one; and having acquired thee as a pastor, the people of Zakholmia were enlightened by thy teachings, O holy Basil.

Enriched by divine understanding, from thy heart thou didst pour forth living discourse, watering the souls and hearts of the faithful, and with the beams of thy miracles warming those had been frozen by the passions, O divinely blessed Basil.

Enlighten my soul and heart, I pray thee, O Bestower of light, O Author of creation, and grant me the gift of hymnody, that I may praise Thy favored one, the all-glorious Basil, who hath taught us to do Thy will, O my God.

Thou didst acquire heavenly wisdom like a talant entrusted to thee, O God-bearing Basil; and, increasing it, thou didst dispel the lies of the demons and didst make the people wise by divine teaching.

The Peëternal One receiveth a beginning, and our nature is renewed. Thus didst thou preach of Him Who was born of the Maiden and is possessed of two natures in a single Hypostasis.

*Theotokion:* As the prophets foretold, a most sacred choir appeared from afar when thou wast to become the true Mother of God; wherefore, glorifying thee, we hymn thee as her who is more exalted than the cherubim and all creation, O Mother of God.

Ode III
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Divine sweetness falleth from thy mouth, O father Basil, and thou gavest drink to thy flock, the Christian people, O blessed Basil.

The tomb where thy precious body lieth exudeth sweet fragrance like the paradise of God, perfuming the faithful and those who serve in thy monastery; wherefore, rejoice, O all-glorious one, and forget us not, O father Basil.

The land of Skenderia receiveth thy body, but thy spirit departeth to the Jerusalem on high, where it exulteth with the prophets, apostles and all the saints. With them pray thou for us to God Who loveth mankind, O divinely blessed Basil.

O holy hierarch Basil, with the teachings of thy holy mouth thou didst deliver thy people from the mouths of the hostile wolves, and didst bring them to the Creator, granting the gift of healing unto all.

As Thou hast glorified Thy servant, O Christ, O Word Who art without beginning, Who appeared in the flesh and hast given us pastors and teachers, forget not his flock, which glorifieth its hierarch, the blessed Basil who is wondrous among Thy saints.

*Theotokion:* The mind of man is unable to fathom the ineffable depths of thy birthgiving, O pure one; for, humbling Himself in thy womb, in His compassion, God renewed all of me.

*Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—*

Thou didst tend the Church of Christ in Orthodox manner, O holy Basil, uprooting the bitter tares of heresy; wherefore, thou dwellest now in the highest, O blessed one.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Magnifying the Word of the Father, Christ our God, Who became incarnate of thee, O Virgin Theotokos, we call thee blessed, O pure Bride of God.

Ode IV
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Full of the Holy Spirit, O sacred father Basil, thou didst dispel evil spirits, enlightening thy flock with thy spiritual teachings of the Faith.

Theologizing concerning the uncreated Unity, Which is distinguished in three Persons, indivisible and unconfused, thou dost enlighten thy flock with sacred theology, O blessed Basil.

Through communion with God thou wast shown to a leader of eloquence divine, O father Basil; and as a lover of virtue thou enlightenest the benighted, teaching those who glorify thy memory.

Thou didst ascend the ladder of the virtues, O blessed one, showing the path of salvation to thy flock; wherefore, honoring thee, the Orthodox people of Zakholmia, Skenderia and Montenegro kiss thy holy relics, O father Basil.

On earth thou didst glorify Christ, Who by nature is ineffable and is most rich in lovingkindness, O all-rich father; wherefore, glorified, O holy Basil, thou delightest in blessedness.

*Theotokion:* The curse of Eve, our first mother, was annulled by thee, O Mother of God; for for us thou gavest birth to the Well-spring of salvation, the Truth of eternal life.

Ode V
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Illumined by the light of God, O holy one, thou didst illumine the souls of those who love God, enlightening them with the divine knowledge of the revealed word. Therewith do thou also enlighten us who honor thy sanctified memory, O Basil.

Exalted by divine light and pure thought, thou wast shown to be an blameless servant of Christ the Savior, O father Basil; wherefore, pray thou for thy flock, that it may be saved from the wicked incursions of the Moslems.

Called by grace, with the words of the Gospel thou didst set at nought the ungodliness of the idols. As thou hast boldness, O blessed Basil, by thy supplications, defend us also against the evil circumstances which assail us.

Comforting thine Orthodox flock with great wonderworking, thou didst journey to Mount Athos; and returning from thence, thou didst proclaim the holy teaching of Christ unto the people. Therewith do thou likewise enlighten us, O Basil, initiate of the sacred mysteries.

By the providence of God thou didst arrive in the land of Ostrog, and afterwards didst also visit the region of Skenderia, teaching it the law of God; wherefore, the faithful people dwelling therein, having received thee, praise and magnify thee as their intercessor, O father Basil.

With the shield of Orthodoxy dost thou fend off pernicious heresies from thy people, O blessed Basil, preserving them likewise from the stench thereof with the sweet fragrance of thy God-bearing relics, O good shepherd.

*Theotokion:* Even after thy strange birthgiving thou didst remain a virgin, O Mary Bride of God. We beseech thee: By thy wondrous protection save thou the sick, and defend thine Orthodox people.

Ode VI
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thy tongue, skillfully sharpened by the Spirit like the pen of a scribe, inscribed the rich and most sacred words on the hearts of the pious at the behest of God, O most blessed father Basil.

Having learned things divine, thou didst enter the Holy of holies, enlightening the faithful with the Spirit, in that thou wast hallowed by the radiance of the Trinity, O father Basil.

Moving the people of God toward salvation, thou didst preach Him Who appeared in the flesh, O shepherd; and as the teacher of Zakholmia and Montenegro thou dost instruct thy flock. Wherefore, O favorite of God, save those who serve and come to thy monastery, who eagerly kiss the precious shrine of thy relics.

In that thou art a favorite of Christ, O father, from the perils and divers misfortunes and tribulations which are inflicted upon the faithful by the wicked do thou deliver us who honor thy holy repose, O blessed Basil.

O help of the faithful and joyful gladness of the sorrowful, with spiritual joy enrich us who desire and entreat thine aid, O newly revealed Basil.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the portal of the King of heaven and the temple of His glory, O most hymned Virgin. Open unto us the portal of lovingkindness, and by thy supplications lead us into the dwelling-place of heavenly glory.

*Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—*

Having enslaved thyself to the Lord from childhood, O wise one, laying waste to thy body by fasting and vigils thou wast shown to be a precious vessel of the all-holy Spirit; wherefore, He ordained thee a pastor of His Church, which thou didst shepherd well. Therefore, thou hast departed unto the Lord Whom thou didst love. We entreat thee: Be thou mindful of us who honor thy holy memory with faith, that we may all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O most honored father Basil!

*Ikos:* With praises let us now hymn the holy hierarch, shepherd and teacher of Zakholmia, Skenderia, Montenegro and Primoria, that by his supplications we may be delivered from the ungodliness and assaults of the evil one, for he hath been revealed to his people as blameless and incorrupt, having offered himself to Christ as an unblemished sacrifice well-pleasing unto God, as a holy hierarch sanctified in body and soul. Wherefore, come, ye faithful people, and praise the true advocate of the Church, the valiant champion of the Orthodox Faith, the all-wondrous worker of miracles, the merciful intercessor for our souls, the all-glorious Basil!

Ode VII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldeans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Enlightened by grace at the behest of God, thou becamest a radiant star in latter times, O wise one, shining forth with rays upon those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The most holy Church illumined thee, that thou mightest adorn it with virtuous acts through the indivisible Trinity Who dwelt within thee, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Unto all human reason, which vain things rendered foolish, didst thou impart healing by thy discourse, O Basil, teaching the people to chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

We marvel at thine all-glorious miracles, O blessed Basil, whereby thou healest infirmities and deliverest from misfortunes; wherefore, obedient to thy command, we cry out to the Lord: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Be thou a helper to our lowliness, O father Basil, and teach us always to chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* He Who is seated, uncircumscribed, in the bosom of God the Father hath now rested, circumscribed, in thy bosom, O all-pure one, clad in thy form for the sake of our salvation. Unto Him do we earnestly cry out: All-hymned and supremely exalted art Thou forever!

Ode VIII
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

With thy humility thou didst crush the prideful serpent, O blessed Basil, ascending to God by thy precious understanding; wherefore, we honor thee, exalting Christ supremely forever.

Giving utterance to the theology of the incarnation of the Word, thou didst save thy people from slavery and error, O father Basil, who didst confound the ungodliness of the Moslems.

Thou didst spring forth like a fragrant flower in Zakholmia, O God-bearing father; and Skenderia, receiving thee, imparteth gifts of healing, like perfume, unto all.

Exuding the sweetness of the grace of God like the Mount of Olives, thy body serveth thy monastery. Therein we boast, hymning the works of God.

O all-pure Virgin, thou ever-flowing and light-bearing well-spring of the heavenly choirs, preserve us by the supplications of Basil, the favorite of God.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O blessed Maiden, thou dost deliver us from the primal curse; wherefore, we cry out to thee with the voice of Gabriel: Rejoice, O cause of the salvation of all!

Ode IX
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

In the land of the meek thou didst appear as meek and innocent, O father Basil, uniting thyself to the armies on high, in that thou art adorned with the splendors of the virtues, O blessed one.

Thou didst splendidly adorn thy throne in all places, even in the midst of the cities of the wicked, among which thou didst dwell like an angel, having been anointed a hierarch, O divinely wise father.

Today thy memory is cause for a feast. The choir of the apostles and the council of the martyrs rejoice, O boast of the righteous, luminary of Montenegro; and praising thee with hymns, the faithful cry out to thee: Deliver us from all perils and misfortunes, O blessed Basil!

Thine all-glorious memory hath shone forth upon us, enlightening the faithful, who entreat thee to remember them and by thy supplications to deliver all thy people, O wise father Basil.

Mortify our carnal passions and lusts, still the tempest of spiritual waves, and strengthen all of us who with faith and love honor thy blessed memory, O newly revealed Basil.

*Theotokion:* Like a drop of heaven did the Rain descend into thy womb, O all-holy Virgin, drying up the torrents of falsehood; and through thee, O all-pure one, hath deliverance been granted unto all believers.

*Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—*

Today the radiant festival is gloriously embued with the holy glory of the face of God, for the day of the holy hierarch’s commemoration hath arrived; and magnifying him, we beseech him to remember by name those who serve in his monastery, and all of us who praise his memory.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Upon thee, O all-pure one, do we set our hope, praying to thee, that thou beg of Christ the Lord that we may be preserved utterly unharmed.

*On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—*

Thou didst mount the ladder of divine understanding and draw nigh unto God, O holy hierarch Basil who hast received the gift of healing, wherewith thou dost heal incurable diseases and drivest away unclean spirits. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, with heartfelt joy we magnify Christ Who hath magnified His favored one. *Twice*

O wondrous father Basil, possessed of a radiant intellect illumined from on high, thou didst shepherd well thy flock. Zakholmia and Skenderia boast in thee; Montenegro and Primoria point to thy miracles; and thy monastery and those who serve therein are adorned by thee. Having allayed the passions, thou didst cause the activity of the demons to cease, and by dispassion, as upon wings, thou didst soar aloft, to where there is ineffable beauty beyond comprehension. Where, pray now for all of us who honor thy dormition.

O Basil, father of fathers, thou wast the ideal of priests, a model of chastity and the might of monastics! Wherefore, exult thou, O Church of Ostrog, with those who serve in thee, for the day of thy confirmation hath arrived: the beacon of love, the fountain of miracles, the vessel of the divine Spirit, the feast of the blessed Basil; and blessing him, we honor him with heartfelt praises.

*Glory…, in Tone VI—*

O thrice-blessed and venerable one, most holy father Basil, good shepherd of thy faithful flock, disciple of Christ, who didst lay down thy life for thy sheep: By thy supplications, O most lauded one, ask now for us great and rich mercy.

*Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

God, Who became incarnate of thee, have we come to know, O Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou entreat, O all-pure one, for the salvation of our souls.

*Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.*

**At Liturgy**
{{text_align=center}}

*On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone VII—*

The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him.

*Stichos:* Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.

Epistle to the Hebrews, §335
{{text_align=center}}

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

*Alleluia, in Tone II—*

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Luke, §24
{{text_align=center}}

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

*Communion Verse—*

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

*Translated from the Church Slavonic by the Reader Isaac E. Lambertsen, from* ***The Menaion****, Vol. VIII \(April\), Part II \(Moscow: Patriarchal Press, 1985\), pp. 266-281. Copyright © 1999. All rights reserved.*

