The 1st Day Of The Month Of January

The Circumcision In The Flesh Of Our Lord Jesus Christ

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints Basil The Great, Archbishop Of Cæsaria In Cappadocia

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, idiomela, in Tone III—

Having caused Christ, the Wellspring of life, to dwell in thy soul by thy pure life, O Basil manifest in sanctity, thou didst pour forth rivers of the teachings of piety upon the whole world; and watered thereby, the faithful people of the Church, the fruits of the confession of thy lips, offer grace to Him Who hath glorified thy memory unto the ages of ages. *Twice*

The myrrh of the grace which was poured forth upon thee anointed thee to act as priest of the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, O divinely revealed Basil, and as the sweet savor of Christ thou hast filled the whole world with the fragrance of the knowledge of Him. Wherefore, graciously accepting the pleas of thy servants, ask thou great mercy for us who honor thee.

*The composition of Byzantius:* Arrayed in hierarchal vesture, O Basil, champion of the Trinity, thou didst stand before the governor’s tribunal, accepting tribulation for the Faith; and showing forth an athlete’s prowess, thou didst put to shame the wrath of the governor, who raged with the might of ungodliness and threatened thee with pitiless dismemberment; yet reasoning zealously, and becoming a martyr by intent, thou didst receive a crown of victory from Christ, Who hath great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Having studied thoroughly the nature of things, and perceived the inconstancy of all, thou didst find one thing unshakable: the transcendent Creator of all that existeth; and cleaving unto Him, thou didst cast aside all desire for other things. Pray thou, O Basil who art manifest in sanctity, that we also may receive our divine desire.

Now & ever…, idiomelon of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Descending unto the human race, the Savior deigned to be wrapped in swaddling-bands, and He did not refuse to be circumcised in the flesh as an eight-day old infant born of His Mother, but without beginning according to His Father. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry: Thou art our God! Have mercy upon us!

Aposticha: these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

As a most splendid temple of the light of the threefold Sun, thou dost illumine the souls of those who are nurtured by thy discourses, O Basil.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

The sound of thy voice is like a trumpet from heaven, and thy teachings, O Basil, are fire, whereby all the teachings of the heretics are utterly consumed.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Distinguishing the one thrice-radiant Light according to Persons, and theologizing the Unity thereof according to essence, O Basil, thou didst cast down Arius and Sabellius.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Honoring the circumcision of the Word and God-man according to the flesh, and the memory of Basil the Great, we venerate the Theotokos.

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone I—

Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth, which hath received thy discourse, whereby thou didst divinely teach and make clear the nature of things, and didst adorn the ways of men. O venerable father, thou royal priesthood, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in the same tone—

O Jesus, Who in the highest dost sit with Thine unoriginate Father and the divine Spirit upon a fiery throne, thou wast well-pleased to be born on earth of Thy Mother, a Maiden who knew not man; wherefore, thou wast circumcised as a babe eight days of age. Glory to Thine all-good counsel! Glory to Thy dispensation! Glory to Thy condescension, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 of the circumcision, idiomela, in Tone VIII—

Descending unto the human race, the Savior deigned to be wrapped in swaddling-bands, and He did not refuse to be circumcised in the flesh as an eight-day old infant born of His Mother, but without beginning according to His Father. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry: Thou art our God! Have mercy upon us! *Twice*

The all-good God was not ashamed to be circumcised with the circumcision of the flesh, but for their salvation provided Himself as an example and pattern for all; for the Creator of the law fulfilleth the prescriptions of the law and the predictions of the prophets concerning Himself. O Lord Who holdest all things in the palm of Thy hand, and wast wrapped in swaddling-clothes, glory be to Thee! *Twice*

And 4 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

O father who art the namesake of kingship, when thou, the royal priesthood, didst shepherd the holy Christian nation with skill and love of wisdom, then the Lord of all, the King of kings, the Son Who is one and equally everlasting and without beginning with Him Who begat Him, crowned thee with the crown of His kingdom. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

Adorned with hierarchal vesture, rejoicing, thou didst preach the Gospel of the kingdom, O Basil, pouring forth upon the Church the doctrine of Orthodoxy. And, illumined now thereby, we theologize and glorify the one Godhead—in the Father Almighty, the only-begotten Word of God and the divine Spirit—three Persons indivisible. Entreat thou the Trinity, that our souls may be enlightened and saved.

Abiding with the choirs of heaven and having thy dwelling with them, O father Basil, thou didst emulate their love by the pure splendor of thy life, living like one of the incorporeal ones while dwelling in the flesh with those on earth. Entreat Christ our God, that He save those who delight in thy divinely inspired teachings from misfortunes and the darkness of ignorance, and that He enlighten our souls.

Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

As a lover of wisdom and of all things pertaining to God, O venerable one, and accounting mortal knowledge thy companion, thou didst live an exemplary life. For, having walled off from thyself the carnal passions with mighty ramparts of abstinence and the law of divine teaching, thou didst preserve the state of thy soul unenslaved, and with the riches of virtue didst make all carnal-mindedness subject to thy spirit. Wherefore, having hated the flesh, the world and the ruler of this world, as thou standest before Christ ask great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone—

Descending unto the human race, the Savior deigned to be wrapped in swaddling-bands, and He did not refuse to be circumcised in the flesh as an eight-day old infant born of His Mother, but without beginning according to His Father. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry: Thou art our God! Have mercy upon us!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from Genesis

God appeared unto Abram and said to him: “I am thy God. Be well-pleasing before Me, and be blameless. And I will establish My covenant between Me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly. Thou shalt be the father of a multitude of nations. And thy name shall no more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham, for I have made thee a father of many nations. And I will increase thee very exceedingly, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee. And I will establish My covenant between thee and thy seed after thee, to their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee.” And Abraham fell upon his face, and worshipped the Lord. And the Lord said unto Abraham: “Thou shalt also fully keep My covenant, thou and thy seed after thee for their generations. And this is the covenant which thou shalt fully keep between Me and you, and between thy seed after thee for their generations: every male of you shall be circumcised. And ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be for a sign of a covenant between me and you, and between thy seed after thee for their generations. And the child of eight days old shall be circumcised by you, every male throughout your generations. And the uncircumcised male, who shall not be circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin on the eighth day, he shall be utterly destroyed from his family, for he hath broken My covenant.”

A Reading from Proverbs

The Lord made me the beginning of His ways for His works. He established me before time was, in the beginning, before He made the earth: even before He made the depths; before the fountains of water came forth, before the mountains were settled, and before all the hills, He begat Me. The Lord made countries and uninhabited tracts, and the highest inhabited parts of the world. When He prepared heaven, I was present with Him; and when He prepared His throne upon the winds, and when He strengthened the clouds above, and when He secured the fountains of the earth, and when He strengthened the foundations of the earth: I was like unto Him. I was that wherein He took delight, and daily I rejoiced in His presence continually.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but ­righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone III—

*The composition of Germanus:* Having caused Christ, the Wellspring of life, to dwell in thy soul by thy pure life, O Basil manifest in sanctity, thou didst pour forth rivers of the teachings of piety upon the whole world; and watered thereby, the faithful people of the Church, the fruits of the confession of thy lips, offer grace to Him Who hath glorified thy memory unto the ages of ages.

The myrrh of the grace which was poured forth upon thee anointed thee to act as priest of the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, O divinely revealed Basil, and as the sweet savor of Christ thou hast filled the whole world with the fragrance of the knowledge of Him. Wherefore, graciously accepting the pleas of thy servants, ask thou great mercy for us who honor thee.

*The composition of Byzantius:* Arrayed in hierarchal vesture, O Basil, champion of the Trinity, thou didst stand before the seat of the judge, accepting tribulation for the Faith; and showing forth an athlete’s prowess, thou didst put to shame the wrath of the governor, who raged with the might of ungodliness and threatened thee with pitiless dismemberment; yet reasoning zealously, and becoming a ­martyr by intent, thou didst receive a crown of victory from Christ, Who hath great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O venerable father, and thou wast a shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Descending unto the human race, the Savior deigned to be wrapped in swaddling-bands, and He did not refuse to be circumcised in the flesh as an eight-day old infant born of His Mother, but without beginning according to His Father. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry: Thou art our God! Have mercy upon us!

Aposticha: these stichera idiomela of the holy hierarch—

*The composition of Byzantius, in Tone I:* O most blessed Basil, thou divine and sacred bee of the Church of Christ! Having armed thyself with the sting of divine desire, thou didst wound the blasphemies of abominable heresies, and didst store up the sweetness of piety for the souls of the faithful. And now, passing over the incorrupt pastures of the divine garden of paradise, be thou mindful of us as thou standest before the consubstantial Trinity.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*The composition of Basil the Monk:* Thou didst combine the virtues of all the saints: the meekness of Moses and the zeal of Elijah, the confession of Peter and the theology of John. And like Paul thou didst not cease to cry aloud: “Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I am not ashamed?” Wherefore, making thine abode with them, pray thou, that our souls may be saved.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*The composition of John the Monk, in Tone II:* Having studied thoroughly the nature of things, and perceived the inconstancy of all, thou didst find one thing unshakable: the transcendent Creator of all that existeth; and cleaving unto Him, thou didst cast aside all desire for other things. Pray thou, O Basil who art manifest in sanctity, that we also may receive our divine desire.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Receiving the grace of miracles from heaven, and having denounced the falsehood of idolatry by thy doctrines, O most blessed Basil, thou art the glory and confirmation of hierarchs, and the model of the teaching of all the venerable. As thou hast boldness before God, entreat Him, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…, in Tone VIII—

The all-good God was not ashamed to be circumcised with the circumcision of the flesh, but for their salvation provided Himself as an example and pattern for all; for the Creator of the law fulfilleth the prescriptions of the law and the predictions of the prophets concerning Himself. O Lord Who holdest all things in the palm of Thy hand, and wast wrapped in swaddling-clothes, glory be to Thee!

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone I—

Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth, which hath received thy discourse, whereby thou didst divinely teach and make clear the nature of things, and didst adorn the ways of men. O venerable father, thou royal priesthood, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in the same tone—

O Jesus, Who in the highest dost sit with Thine unoriginate Father and the divine Spirit upon a fiery throne, thou wast well-pleased to be born on earth of Thy Mother, a Maiden who knew not man; wherefore, thou wast circumcised as a babe eight days of age. Glory to Thine all-good counsel! Glory to Thy dispensation! Glory to Thy condescension, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

Let us all praise Basil as the royal adornment of the Church, an inexhaustible treasury of doctrines; for thereby he hath taught us to worship the Holy Trinity, which is united in essence but distinguished as to hypostasis.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

O all-wise Basil, as thou standest before the Trinity, pray that we who hymn thee and honor thy memory may receive grace, mercy and the washing away of our transgressions on the day of judgment, that with mouth and heart we may glorify Him Who alone loveth mankind.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same melody—

The Creator of all and Master of the world, though He is on high with the Father and the Spirit, is circumcised on earth as a babe eight days of age. Truly divine and wondrous are Thy works! For Thou, O Master, Who art the Fulfillment of the law, wast circumcised for our sake.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Thou didst divinely draw forth the mystic riches of ineffable wisdom, and upon all hast poured forth the waters of Orthodoxy which divinely gladden the hearts of the faithful and fittingly drown the commands of the infidels. Wherefore, in both thou hast been shown to be an invincible champion of the Trinity by the sweat of thy works of piety, O holy hierarch Basil. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

To the whole world hast thou given to drink thy doctrines, the collected dogmas of piety, as though they were water; for the Wellspring of life truly resided within thee, O Basil. As thou hast acquired boldness, O divinely inspired one, beseech Him to grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV—

He Who is invisible in essence is now become visible in the flesh; the uncreated Word now taketh form, born of the pure Virgin. Wherefore, following the law for the sake of us men, He is circumcised as a babe eight days of age. Let us therefore worship Him as our Savior.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify Thee, O Basil, thou holy hierarch of Christ, who didst piously preserve the Church of Christ immaculate.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are those who dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice*.

But if the church be dedicated to the Circumcision of the Lord, the following magnification is chanted—

We magnify Thee, O Christ, Bestower of life, and we honor the circumcision of Thine all-pure flesh, which Thou didst deign to endure in accordance with the law.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Judge them, O God, that do me injustice; war against those who war against me. \[Ps. 34: 1\]

B Take hold of weapon and shield, and arise unto my help. \[Ps. 34: 2\]

A The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed upon us. \[Ps. 4: 7\]

B As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

A Thou hast given a sign unto those who fear Thee, that they may flee from before the face of thy bow. \[Ps. 59: 6\]

B That we may know upon the earth Thy way, among the nations Thy salvation. \[Ps. 66: 3\]

A All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. \[Ps. 97: 3\]

B Let us worship at the place where His feet have stood. \[Ps. 131: 7\]

A Then shall all the trees of the forest rejoice. \[Ps. 95: 12\]

B God is our king before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. \[Ps. 73: 12\]

A Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for it is holy. \[Ps. 98: 5\]

B Let God, our God, bless us; let God bless us. \[Ps. 66: 7-8\]

A Save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance. \[Ps. 27: 9\]

B Shepherd them and bear them up unto eternity. \[Ps. 27: 9\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, our God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

By the power of thy divine words thou didst cast down dark heresies: thou didst drown all the insolence of Eunomius, for thou didst preach that the Spirit is God, and thou didst slay the enemy with the work of thy hands; and thou didst drive away all the ministry of Sabellius and didst set at naught all the reasonings of Nestorius. O holy hierarch Basil, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in the same melody—

The grace of thy divine discourses and the mystic heights of thy dogmas have become for us a ladder of divine ascent; for having acquired the clarion of the Spirit, O father, thou didst thereby proclaim divine doctrines. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in a place of verdure, receiving the reward for thy struggles. O venerable hierarch Basil, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same melody—

The Master and Creator of all, Who received flesh from thine all-pure womb, hath shown thee to be an intercessor for men, O most immaculate one; wherefore, we all flee to thee, asking to be cleansed of our transgressions, O Mistress, and to be delivered from everlasting torments and all the oppression of the evil prince of this world. For this cause we cry unto thee: Entreat thy Son and God, that He grant remission of transgression unto those who with faith worship thy most holy birthgiving.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John §36 \[10:9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O venerable father, and thou wast a shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Canon of the feast, the irmos whereof is chanted twice, the troparia repeated to make up 4 in number. And that of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the composition of Stephen, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

The eighth day, which is a foretype of that which is to come, is by Thy voluntary abasement enlightened and sanctified, O Christ; for thereon Thou wast circumcised in the flesh in accordance with the law.

Christ receiveth circumcision on the eighth day after His nativity, and the shadow of that day withdraweth, the light of the new grace shining forth.

Canon of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia, the composition of John of Damascus, in the same tone—

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

It hath been fitting that thy voice come unto those desiring to sing thy praises, O father Basil. Accepting their entreaty, grant us grace in abundance.

Thou didst tread the difficult path of the virtues, and didst attain unto the smooth and pleasant entry to heaven, O Basil, and hast shown thyself to be a model for all.

By thy desire for the love of wisdom thou didst suppress the uprising of the passions which tormenteth the flesh; wherefore, thou dwellest in the incorrupt mansions of heaven, O father Basil.

With the sword of the Spirit thou didst right profitably cut down the passions of both soul and body, O Basil; and thou didst bring thyself to the Master as a sacrifice.

As an initiate of the ineffable mysteries, O sacred father Basil, thou didst manifestly instruct the Church of Christ in His mysteries and hast shone upon us the light of the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Who can fittingly describe thy conceiving, which is beyond words? For thou hast given birth in the flesh to God Who hath shown Himself to be our Savior and Lord, O most pure one.

Katavasia: The irmoi of both canons of the feast of the Theophany.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

The transcendent Word Who became incarnate hath been circumcised, that the law might cease; and He hath given us the beginning of divine grace and life incorruptible.

As the Fulfiller of the law, and not as One opposed to God, Christ showed Himself to be incarnate, and hath deigned of His own will to be circumcised on the eighth day.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

Thy memorial hath arrived and shone forth at the same time as the nativity of Christ, the ineffable mystery whereof thou didst manifestly reveal by thy teachings.

Made steadfast in the fear of God, in that it is the beginning of wisdom, thou didst soar aloft in the highest love of wisdom, O Basil.

Full of all instruction, O Basil, thou wast shown to be a light unto the world, not only that which is below and is trodden upon by our feet, but that which is more sublime.

O all-wise Basil, thou hast shown activity to be the entry into vision most divine, and by activity thou didst enter therein; and thou hast manifestly taught the understanding of all that existeth.

*Theotokion:* Without seed thou didst conceive in thy womb, and didst ineffably give birth to God incarnate, upon Whom the hosts of heaven dare not gaze, O pure Ever-virgin.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

The Lord of all endureth circumcision and, in that He is good, He cutteth away the transgressions of men, and today granteth salvation to the world. And Basil, the high priest of the Creator, the radiant and divine initiate of the mysteries of Christ, rejoiceth on high.

Sessional hymn of the hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having learned the wisdom of the Word and set aside the writings of the law, thou didst proclaim to all the word of grace, and by thy words thou didst erase the tablets of men’s souls, and thereon didst inscribe divine doctrines. Wherefore, passing through the darkness, a cloud protecting thy body, thou didst shine forth in the Spirit, O holy hierarch Basil. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

As Thou art an abyss of love for mankind, O Master, Thou didst assume the appearance of a servant and wast circumcised in the flesh, granting Thy great mercy unto all men.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Circumcision hath ceased since Christ was circumcised of His own will, saving a multitude of the nations by grace.

The eighth day, whereon the Master was circumcised in the flesh, is an image of the everlasting life of the age to come.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

As the Church of Christ is adorned like a bride by His nativity, so is it also adorned by thy memorial, O most blessed one.

Doing battle for God, thou wast shown to be invincible, O Basil, making all subject to His precepts.

Thou hast been given to the Church by God as a firm rampart and bulwark, O most blessed Basil.

O father Basil, thou hast been shown to be a scythe cutting down the adversary, and a fire consuming falsehood.

*Theotokion:* We beseech thee, O pure one who didst conceive God without seed: Pray thou ever for thy servants.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Having issued forth ineffably from the Virgin Mother, O Lord, thou didst not decline to clothe Thyself in human guise as a babe, and in accordance with the law didst fulfill the law.

Israel, in that she loveth the shadow of the law, hath become like the night, giving rise to Christ, Who hath appeared, shining forth therefrom, as the Light of the world.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

Today the Church doth truly introduce a twofold feast: that of the Master Who hath appeared on earth as a babe, and the memorial of His wise and thrice-blessed servant.

Christ, the Light unapproachable, resting in thee, O venerable one, hath shown thee to be a radiant lamp unto the world; wherefore, we hymn thy memory, O Basil.

The Genesis described by Moses on Sinai amid great darkness hast thou described for all, giving utterance from the storehouses of divine wisdom, O all-blessed Basil.

Neither Moses the law-giver, nor Joseph, the chief of pharaoh’s granaries, who lived before the law, were like unto thee; for thou, O Basil, didst show thyself to break the Flesh of God.

*Theotokion:* To thee, who gavest birth to Christ, the Creator of all, do we cry: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, O thou who hast shone forth upon us the Light! Rejoice, O thou who didst contain the uncontainable God!

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The great abyss of sin encompasseth me, and, emulating the prophet, I cry to thee: Lead me up from corruption, O Lord!

The law hath come to an end since Christ, Who is the Fulfiller of the law, hath become a babe, receiving circumcision. He hath annulled the curse of the law.

The keeping of the sabbath, circumcision and the arrogance of the Jews ceased at the behest of Christ Who hath appeared, and the springtime of grace hath shone forth.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

Thou didst abundantly feed the souls of the poor tormented by starvation, O Basil, and didst fill the hearts of the hungry with all divine gladness.

Thou didst richly feed the hungry with heavenly food; for thy discourse is angelic bread, O Basil, and thou becamest an excellent issuer of the grain thereof.

Like a bee thou didst industriously gather honey from the flowers of all the virtues, O Basil, and as a wise man thou art blessed therein.

Thou didst yearn to depart this world and to live with God; wherefore, forsaking things inconstant and corrupt, O most blessed Basil, as a wise man thou hast acquired things which are abiding.

*Theotokion:* Save thy servants from misfortunes, O Theotokos, for after God it is to thee that we flee as to an impregnable rampart and intercession.

Kontakion of the hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Thou hast been shown to be the unshakable foundation of the Church, bestowing upon all men a dominion which cannot be taken away, and sealing them with thy precepts, O venerable Basil who revealest heavenly things!

*Ikos:* Basil the Great, the cup of chastity, the mouth of wisdom, the foundation of doctrines, shineth forth noetically upon all. Come ye, therefore, and let us stand in the house of God, gazing upon him with fervor, adorning ourselves with his miracles, having been illumined with the splendor of his life, and been cooled by his pure spirit, emulating his faith, ardor and humility, whereby he became a habitation of the essence of God; and, crying aloud unto him, let us chant: O venerable Basil who revealest heavenly things!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Radiant and most splendid is the nativity of Christ, which today hath depicted the mystery of the restoration which is to come! For the Savior is circumcised in lawful manner, not as God, but as man, the Fulfillment of the law.

Fulfilling the law, the Creator of the law today is of His own will circumcised in the flesh, cutting off the winter of sin, granting all to cry: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

The Son is the image of the Father, and the Spirit is the image of the Son; and thou, O Basil, art the pure reflection of the Spirit and the abode of the whole Trinity. Blessed is thy memory, and those who glorify it are themselves glorified!

Having plunged thy mind into the unfathomable depths of God and gathered precious pearls of understanding, thou didst fill the world with wisdom, and didst teach it to cry: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O the single inspiration of mind of the sacred twain! For, united in divine desire, Basil was in Gregory, and Gregory in Basil, like a single soul, inseparable, in two bodies. Entreat Christ now in behalf of your flock.

The father of orphans and defender of widows, the riches of the poor, the consolation of the sick, the guidance of the wealthy, the staff of old age and instruction of youth, and the rule of virtue for monastics wast thou shown to be, O Basil.

Having purified thy mind of all filthy defilement, O Basil, thou didst examine spiritual things with the Spirit Whom thou didst desire; wherefore, hymning the Trinity, with boldness thou hast cried out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* On Mount Sinai Moses foresaw as a bush which burned with fire thee who received, without being consumed, the unbearable Effulgence of the ineffable Essence, Who united Himself to the coarseness of the flesh, He being One of the holy Hypostases.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* God the Word, Who in His ineffable wisdom created all things and brought them out of oblivion into existence, do ye bless as Lord, O ye works, and exalt supremely for all ages!

On the eighth day Jesus the Master was circumcised as a babe; and He receiveth His name, in that He is the Savior and Lord of the world.

To the nativity of Christ we join the eighth day, the most glorious memorial of the holy hierarch; and honoring it with faith, let us hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

O ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord Who, in His ineffable providence, hath given Basil to the world as a light of piety and clarion of theology!

O ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord Who, in His rich activity, made His abode within the wise Basil, and through Him piously gave utterance to theology.

Delighting in thy divine discourses, O Basil, and revelling unceasingly in thy memory, we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

O Basil, thou hast emitted thy discourses upon the world like brilliant rays which by light instruct all to worship the single Essence of the Trinity, crying: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, the timeless Word of God, Who issued forth from the Father before time began, and shone forth from the Virgin in latter times.

At Ode IX we do not sing the Magnificat, but chant instead the refrains of the feast—

Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who hath been circumcised in the flesh in accordance with the law!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thee do we magnify, O blessed and most pure Theotokos, who through thy virginal womb ineffably didst make God incarnate, the Luminary Who shone forth before the sun and hath come to us in the flesh.

Then the second choir likewise chanteth the refrain and irmos. The following three refrains are chanted before the troparia of the canon of the circumcision—

Magnify, O my soul, Him Who receiveth circumcision on the eighth day! *Twice*

Today the Master is circumcised in the flesh as a babe, fulfilling the law. *Once*

Today the Master hath been circumcised in the flesh and been called Jesus. *Once*

Transcending the bounds of all human nature, Christ was supernaturally born of the Virgin; and as the writing of the law commandeth, He is circumcised in the flesh and shown to be the Fulfiller of the law.

Come, and in holiness let us celebrate the glorious names of Christ the Master; for in godly manner He hath been named Jesus today. And with them let us also magnify the memory of the holy hierarch.

And these refrains of the hierarch are chanted before the troparia of his canon—

Magnify, O my soul, Basil who is great among hierarchs! *Twice*

Magnify, O my soul, the all-radiant beacon of the whole world! *Twice*

Magnify, O my soul, the great Basil of Cæsaria! *Twice*

Instead of Glory…—

Magnify, O my soul, him who hath adorned the Church of Christ!

Instead of Now & ever…—

Magnify, O my soul, the all-pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more honorable than the armies of heaven!

O Basil, like a sheep faithful to Christ, the Chief Shepherd, thou didst follow His life-bearing steps; for thou didst expose thy soul to the tyrant, O most blessed father, valiantly braving danger for the sake of the Church.

Beholding the most sacred unity of the Church of Christ, which was adorned by thine episcopate, O wise one, the tyrannical destroyer of all fell as though struck by a bolt of thunder; for he was unable to endure the radiance of the Spirit which was within thee, O Basil.

O Basil, thou wast vouchsafed an apostolic see, a place in the choir of the athletes of Christ, the tabernacle of the patriarchs, the delight of the righteous and the joy of the prophets; for thou wast a servant of the Theotokos and an initiate of the mysteries of the Trinity.

The Lord Who alone covereth the chambers with waters, Who restraineth the sea and drieth up the depths, and Who received flesh of thee, O pure one, doth hasten from Bethlehem to the Jordan, to be baptized in the flesh.

Then both choirs, descending, chant the first refrain of the feast, and the irmos of Canon I of Theophany. They then chant the refrain of the Theotokos \[sung instead of Now & ever…\] and the irmos of Canon II of Theophany.

Exapostilarion of the hierarch: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

With the desire of love of wisdom thou didst cut away that which covered thy soul, O father, and in thy miracles wast shown to the world to be like the sun; and thou hast illumined the thoughts of the faithful, O divinely wise Basil, initiate of the mysteries of the Trinity and servant of the Theotokos. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—

The Creator of the ages, Who hath fulfilled the law, is circumcised in the flesh as a babe eight days of age; He is wrapped in swaddling-bands as a man; He is fed with milk Who, as God, sustaineth all things by His infinite might and holdeth all things in His hand.

On the Praises, 6 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

He Who as the Word was ineffably begotten of the Father without separation or corruption endureth circumcision in the flesh, yet as God begotten by God He remaineth immutably divine; wherefore, He Who is above the law, following the law doth deliver all from the curse of the law, and granteth them blessing from on high. For this cause, praising His all-good condescension, we hymn and glorify Him in thanksgiving, entreating Him to grant our souls great mercy. *Twice*

Having become a child of God through grace, by the regeneration of divine baptism, O venerable one, in essence and truth thou didst confess the preëternal Son and Word of God, as consubstantial and equally without beginning with the Father; and with the brilliance of thy words thou didst shut the gaping mouths of the heretics. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the kingdom on high, reigning together with Christ, Who ruleth alone and naturally, and doth richly grant great mercy unto the world.

Through activity and vision thou didst enter within the temple of heaven as a sacred priest, vested in the principles of wisdom as with holy raiment. And now, serving as priest at the altar of heaven, O venerable one, and standing before God, performing the immaterial service, mercifully remember those who celebrate thy sacred and most honored memory, O most blessed Basil, entreating Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.

Wholly consecrated to God and dedicated to Him from childhood in every way, shining forth with the rays of wisdom all-divine thou hast made clear the understanding of those things which exist, speaking plainly and holding forth in wisdom, revealing the order of nature, that all may recognize the work of God. Wherefore, we proclaim thee to be a divinely eloquent and godly teacher and a radiant beacon of the Church, who prayeth to Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.

Made steadfast by the fear of God, thou didst understand the beginning of wisdom, O Basil. Thou didst surpass fear by the wisdom and uprightness of thy life, O father, and, united to God by love, thou becamest His alone. Wherefore, having learned His divine justifications and judgments, thou didst teach morals to men, and didst adorn the minds of the faithful, making the council splendid by thy spiritual laws. For this cause, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O venerable father, and thou wast a shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Descending unto the human race, the Savior deigned to be wrapped in swaddling-bands, and He did not refuse to be circumcised in the flesh as an eight-day old infant born of His Mother, but without beginning according to His Father. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry: Thou art our God! Have mercy upon us!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the circumcision, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the hierarch.

After the Entrance, the troparia of the feast and of the saint; Glory…, kontakion of the saint; Now & ever…, kontakion of the feast.

Prokimenon of the circumcision, in Tone VI—

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance.

*Stichos:* Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me.

Prokimenon of the hierarch, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

Epistle to the Colossians, § 254 \[Col. 2: 8-12\]

Brethren: Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For in Him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in Him, Who is the head of all principality and power: in Whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ: Buried with Him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with Him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised Him from the dead.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318 \[Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\]

Brethren: Such a high priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII—

*Stichos:* O Shepherd of Israel, attend, Thou Who leadest Joseph like a sheep.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Gospel according to Luke, § 6 \[Lk. 2: 20-21, 40-52\]

At that time, the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them. And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the Child, His name was called Jesus, which was so named of the angel before He was conceived in the womb. And the Child grew, and waxed strong in the Spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon Him. Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover. And when He was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and His mother knew not of it. But they, supposing Him to have been in the company, went a day’s journey; and they sought Him among their kinsfolk and acquaintances. And when they found Him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking Him. And it came to pass that, after three days, they found Him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions. And all that heard Him were astonished at His understanding and answers. And when they saw Him, they were amazed; and His mother said unto Him: “Son, why hast Thou thus dealt with us? Behold, Thy father and I have sought Thee, sorrowing.” And He said unto them: “How is it that ye sought Me? Did ye not know that I must be about My Father’s business?” And they understood not the saying which He spake unto them. And He went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them; but His mother kept all these sayings in her heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verses—

Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

