Also on The 2nd Day of the Month of January

Commemoration of Our Venerable and God-bearing Father, Seraphim, Wonderworker of Sarov

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried..., 4 stichera, in Tone IV—

Assembling today, O ye Christian people, let us crown the earthly angel and heavenly man with hymns of praise, and let us cry out to him with fervor: O blessed father Seraphim, most glorious boast of ascetics, pray thou to the Lord in our behalf, that He have mercy upon our souls. *Twice*

Loving chastity and meekness from thy youth, O father Seraphim, with purity of mind and heart didst thou acquire the love of Christ, whereby thou didst draw nigh unto God. Do thou therefore now entreat Him to deliver from misfortune those who keep thine honored memory with faith.

O venerable father Seraphim, the multitudes of Christian people, assembling today for the glorification of thy precious relics, are filled with joy and gladness. For thou art shown to be healing for the afflicted and feet for the lame who have recourse unto the shrine of thy relics with faith.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Rejoice, and be glad in the Lord, O Monastery of Sarov, for in thee hath shone forth a new light of the land of Russia. Adorn thyself and join chorus, O Church of God, and rejoice with her, O ye multitudes of monks. Exult in joy, O assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church; and having woven a wreath of spiritual flowers, cry ye out with David: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. For this is the beginning of the glory of the venerable Seraphim, whereof do thou make us partakers through thy supplications, O blessed one.

Now and ever..., of the Forefeast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV—

O all-glorious wonder! He Who baptizeth by the Holy Spirit and fire cometh to be baptized by John in the Jordan, neither simply God nor plainly man, but in two natures, the one only-begotten Son, seeking baptism as a man from a mortal, and as God taking away the sin of the world, and granting great mercy unto all.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II—

Departing thy native region and travelling to the city of Kiev, thou didst there, at the relics of the wonderworkers of the Caves, receive a blessing for the path of saving struggle. Thus do thou also send down a blessing upon us who keep thine all-holy and most honored memory.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Great skill didst thou lovingly receive in the obedience of monastic struggles, O venerable father Seraphim, and thou didst astonish the brethren by thy patience and love. Pray that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Strengthened by the counsels of the abbot, thou didst dwell in the wilderness of Sarov, O father; thou didst make haste to abide there in prayerful struggle, and wast shown to be a habitation of the Holy Spirit.

Glory...: The foregoing is repeated

Now and ever..., of the Forefeast, in Tone V—

Christ our God cometh to the River Jordan to be baptized, desiring to cleanse us of our iniquities by His appearance, in that He alone is good and loveth mankind.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; and, aflame with the desire to serve Him alone, thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer and labor; and with compunction of heart acquiring the love of Christ, thou wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. Wherefore, we cry unto thee: Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim.

Glory…, Now & ever…: the troparion of the Forefeast, in Tone IV—

Make ready, O Zebulun! Adorn thyself, O Naphtali! O River Jordan, leaping up, receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! Rejoice, O Adam, with our first mother! Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; for He that beheld you naked hath revealed Himself, that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!

At Great Vespers

We chant “Blessed is the man..., the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried..., 8 stichera: 3 of the Forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

With piety let us sound forth the hymns of the forefeast of the honorable baptism of our God; for, lo! as a man He desireth to come to His forerunner in the flesh, and to ask for saving baptism unto the edification of all who are enlightened by faith in holiness, becoming partakers of the Spirit.

Christ is shown forth, God appeareth, as David most manifestly wrote beforehand, and He cometh to His servant, asking baptism. O River Jordan, be thou filled with gladness! O earth and sea, mountains and hills, ye hearts of men, exult now, receiving the noetic Light!

How can the river’s streams receive Thee, O Almighty Lord, Who art the River of peace and the Torrent of sustenance, as it is written, Who dost wrap the sky in clouds, dost strip away all the malice of the enemy and clothest mortals in immortality?

And 5 stichera of the saint, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O marvelous wonder…”—

O most glorious wonder! A struggler for piety is revealed at Sarov, and the most wondrous Seraphim becometh a fervent intercessor for us before God. Rejoice, O Monastery of Sarov, who containest within thyself the relics of the venerable one! Exult, O ye multitudes of the Orthodox, who have the most wondrous Seraphim as a defender amid misfortune and who cry unto him: Rejoice, thou light of the land of Russia! Utterly disperse the legions of our adversaries, and beseech the Lord to grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

O marvelous wonder! In the Monastery of Sarov, behold, the blessed Seraphim revealeth himself unto us as an unshakable pillar of piety. Wherefore, O ye assemblies of the divinely wise, be ye exalted in the spirit to the heights, crying out to the venerable one: O venerable father Seraphim, beseech the Lord to grant peace and great mercy to our souls!

Wondrous are Thy mysteries, O Christ our God, for Thou hast given us a beacon in the venerable Seraphim, a mighty champion for our right-believing hierarchs against the adversary, and intercessor for monks and all Orthodox Christians, and the boast and foundation of his holy monastery, who now entreateth Thee, O Lord, that Thou grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

When thou didst enter the wilderness of Sarov, O venerable one, utterly casting off thine own will, thou didst show steadfast obedience to all, for thou didst joyously endure abuse and disrespect. Thou didst receive blows and smiting at the hands of evil men, yet didst thou pray for them, O venerable one. And glorifying thy most honored memory, we beseech thee, O venerable one: Entreat the Lord, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Blessed is the Monastery of Sarov, which hath thee, O venerable father Seraphim, as a treasury of virtues, a vessel of purity and chastity, a receptacle of grace, a fount of healings, a physician who cureth the infirm without fee, a true faster, a comforter of the afflicted, and a calm haven for those who are tempest-tossed by the passions of life. O venerable father Seraphim, pray that peace and great mercy be granted unto us that celebrate thine honored memory.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and let us glorify our most wondrous father today, and thus with songs of praise let us cry unto him: O venerable father Seraphim, thou wast truly vouchsafed a godly life, receiving from God a crown of never-fading glory. Wherefore, the Monastery of Sarov doth boast in thee, and the people, beholding the precious shrine of thy relics and the miracles wrought through thine intercession, glorify the Lord Who doth glorify thee. Entreat Him, O venerable father, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls!

Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI—

Christ the Truth cometh to the Jordan to be baptized by John; and he saith unto Him: “It is I who must needs be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me? I who am grass dare not touch the Fire! Sanctify me, O Master, by Thy divine epiphany!”

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(3:1-9\).

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(5:15-6:3\).

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgement for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(4:7-15\).

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that which is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I—

With what crowns of praise shall we crown the great ascetic, the venerable Seraphim? For he was shown to be a good guide to steadfast faith and virtue, instructing those who came unto him with divinely inspired teachings and by his angelic life. Wherefore, we cry unto him: O venerable one, entreat Christ to establish the Orthodox faith and to save our souls!

Come, O ye multitudes of monks, let us piously praise the venerable one today, the true disciple of the Savior, who hath trampled down the delusion of the world, taken the yoke of Christ upon his shoulders, and put to shame the hosts of the demons. And let us cry thus unto him: O father Seraphim, forget not us that praise and honor thy holy memory!

O venerable Seraphim, thy radiant and godly memory hath moved kings, princes and hierarchs to awe, for while yet in the flesh thou, like one of the bodiless beings, didst put to shame the invisible foe. The whole province of Tambov and the holy Monastery of Sarov rejoice, possessed of thy holy relics, through which health is granted unto all that draw nigh to thy precious shrine with faith. Wherefore, enlightened by thee, we cry to thee, O venerable one: Pray thou that our souls be saved!

Glory..., in Tone V—

O land of Russia, rejoice this day; and be thou glad, O holy Monastery of Sarov! Ye multitudes of the faithful who have hastened hither today, let us glorify our venerable father, pastor and teacher, the divinely wise guide of the lost, the ready healer of all the afflicted, the great adornment of the Russian land, whom praising thus we say: O venerable Seraphim, save us by thy prayers!

Now and ever..., Theotokion, in the same tone—

O most honored Virgin, thou art the temple and portal, the palace and throne of the King, through whom my Deliverer, Christ the Lord, Who is the Sun of righteousness, appeared to those who slept in darkness, desiring to enlighten that which He had fashioned according to His own image by His own hand. Wherefore, O all-hymned one, as thou hast acquired maternal boldness before Him, entreat Him unceasingly, that our souls be saved!

At the aposticha, these stichera of the forefeast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone I—

Splendid was the feast which hath now passed, O Savior, but even more splendid is that which is to come: the former had an angel as its herald, but this one hath found the forerunner to prepare it; on the former Bethlehem lamented like as a mother bereft of her children, when their blood was shed, but this is found to be a fruitful laver through its blessed waters. Then the star announced glad tidings to the magi, but now the Father hath shown Thee to the world. O Lord Who becamest incarnate and now manifestly cometh forth, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

The composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone II:

Again my Jesus is washed clean in the Jordan; again doth He expunge our sins! For He truly cometh unto baptism, desiring to wash away the record of Adam’s sin. And He said unto John: “Come thou and perform the first act of the ­awesome mystery, O Baptist! Come quickly, and extend thy hand: touch thou the head of Him Who hath crushed the head of the serpent and opened paradise, which disobedience shut through the guile of the serpent, the eating of the tree of old!

*Stichos:* The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

*In Tone III:* Luminous was the feast which hath passed, yet even more glorious is this present day: for on the former the magi worshipped the Savior, but on this a glorious servant hath baptized the Master. Then the shepherds, piping, beheld and marvelled, but now the voice of the Father hath proclaimed the only-begotten Son.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O venerable father Seraphim, who can recount thy toils and pangs? And what tongue can describe thy harsh life in the wilderness, thy vigils and fasting, yea, and thy life in seclusion, thy silence and unceasing prayer? Thou hast truly been shown to be the adornment of ascetics and a steadfast intercessor before God. Wherefore, we cry unto thee: Rejoice, O model of monastic life! Rejoice, great consolation amid misfortunes and sorrows, and fervent advocate for all! O venerable one, pray thou that our souls be saved!

Now & ever, of the forefeast, in Tone III—

Come, all ye faithful, and, forsaking the land of Judæa, let us traverse the wilderness of Jordan; and there shall we behold today Him Who for our sake hath appeared in the flesh, requesting baptism in the streams of the Jordan of the Baptist, who refused, crying aloud in fear: “I dare not touch Fire with my hand of clay! Jordan and the sea fled and turned back, O Savior; and how can I place my hand upon the crown of the head of Thee before Whom the seraphim tremble? Jordan withdrew when Elisha received the mantle of Elijah; how then is it that it hath not sunk into chaos and the nethermost depths, beholding Thee naked in its streams? How is it that it doth not scald me, who am set all afire by Thee?” “Wherefore dost thou hesitate to baptize my Lord, O Baptist?” the Jordan cried out to John. “Why hinderest thou the cleansing of many? Sanctify all creation, and remain Thou also to sanctify me, and the nature of water, for it is for this that Thou hast made Thyself manifest!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; and, aflame with the desire to serve Him alone, thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer and labor; and, acquiring the love of Christ, with compunction of heart thou wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. Wherefore, we cry unto thee: Save us by thy supplications, O our venerable Father Seraphim! *Twice*

Troparion of the forefeast of Theophany, in Tone IV—

Make ready, O Zebulun! Adorn thyself, O Naphtali! O River Jordan, leaping up, receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! Rejoice, O Adam, with our first mother! Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; for He that beheld you naked hath revealed Himself, that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the saint, twice. Glory..., Now and ever..., the troparion of the Forefeast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Having overcome the temptations of the enemy by the sign of the Cross and by prayer, thou wast well-pleasing to the Lord by fasting and abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst receive the gift of miracles, bestowing healing upon all who approach the shrine of thy relics with faith, O venerable Seraphim. Beseech Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the Forefeast, in Tone I, Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

Having clothed Thyself in my poverty, O my Jesus, mingling with Thy servants Thou comest forth, requesting baptism from a servant, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, John, beholding Thee, cried out: “How can I baptize Thee Who art wholly without defilement, O all-good God?

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I—

In the depths of the wilderness of Sarov thou didst kneel upon a rock, lifting up thy venerable hands unto the Lord. Wherefore, thou didst receive from the Savior the grace of the Holy Spirit, to heal the suffering bodies and enlighten the souls of the faithful. For this cause, we cry unto thee: Entreat Christ God, O venerable one, that He save us who celebrate thy holy memory! *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the Forefeast, in Tone IV, Spec. Mel: “Go Thou quickly before...”—

The Rich One, having beggared Himself in His great loving-kindness, and desiring to enrich us who once made ourselves beggars through intemperance, cometh forth to enter the streams of the Jordan and to be baptized openly by John. O ye faithful, let us hymn His utter humility!

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Seraphim, and we honor thy holy memory, thou instructor of monastics and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VII—

Thy virtuous life hath now shone forth in the land of Russia, O venerable one, and thou art glorified by all with hymns of praise; for, ascending like Elijah on the chariot of the virtues, in thy soul thou hast soared aloft to heaven, and there thou hast been justly crowned with a most splendid wreath. Wherefore, we cry unto thee in thanksgiving: O blessed Seraphim, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto us that honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone I, Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

In His goodness Christ cometh forth to the streams of the River Jordan, and therein He desireth to accomplish our salvation through grace. O godly Forerunner, receive Him, rejoicing, and in the waters wash Him Who hath desired to be baptized and alone loveth mankind.

Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43 \[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Celebrating spiritually on the appointed festival of the venerable father and piously rejoicing, let us fervently cry aloud today, O ye faithful: Rejoice, O blessed Seraphim! Rejoice, heavenly man and earthly angel! Rejoice, O thou who hast guided many to the path of salvation! Rejoice, boast of pious Orthodox Christians and confirmation of the land of Russia! Pray thou in behalf of our souls!

Canon of the Forefeast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and 2 canons of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the \[Greek\] alphabet, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord Who by His divine command dried up the impassable and turbulent sea, and guided the people of Israel across it on foot, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

The divine Forerunner, who knoweth the advent of the Lord, emergeth from the desert, crying out with splendor: “Our deliverance hath drawn nigh and appeared! Repent ye, and cleanse yourselves with water!”

O Word, Who with the Father art equally without beginning, with the immersion of repentance which is Thy baptism cleanse me wholly who am engulfed in a flood of sins; and ever grant deliverance unto the faithful, for the sake of Thine infinite loving-kindness.

The land of Zebulun, as it is written, beholding the unwaning Light, was enlightened; for, lo! He is come to the streams of the Jordan! And it hymneth God Who is over all, crying out: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

The divinely eloquent Forerunner, seeing all the people who had come, exclaimed to them: “Who hath told you to flee from the coming wrath? Show forth fruits of repentance, O ye who are saved by grace!”

Canon I of the Venerable Seraphim, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

O Lord, open Thou mine unworthy lips and grant me utterance of understanding, that I may worthily hymn the memory of the blessed Seraphim, who with the angels now prayeth to Thee to deliver us from every grievous circumstance.

Thou wast a great intercessor before the Theotokos, O venerable one, and wast vouchsafed to behold her in the company of the apostles. And now, cease not to visit thy children with thy prayers.

From thy youth, O venerable one, thou didst submit thyself spiritually to the Lord, and having subdued the passions of thy body through rigorous abstinence, thou wast adorned with every virtue, O most wise one.

*Theotokion:* O most blessed Mistress, who gavest birth unto the all-good God in the flesh, cleanse thou my heart which is tormented by passions, that I may magnify thee with faith and love.

Canon II of the Venerable Seraphim, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Thou didst tread the straight and narrow path to the heavenly kingdom in accordance with the commandment of Christ the Master, rejecting the broad and spacious path. Pray thou now for us who celebrate thy most radiant memory.

Having ascended the mount of dispassion and taken up thy cross from thy youth, thou didst follow after Christ without hesitation. And having acquired spiritual wisdom, thou didst attain the heavenly Jerusalem, O venerable one. Entreat Him Who loveth mankind in our behalf.

Standing now before the throne of God, O venerable one, intercede for the suffering Russian land; and by thy supplications, O venerable one, ask thou salvation for the Christ-loving people of Russia.

*Theotokion:* Hearken, O Lady, unto those who flee to thee with faith and love, and who hymn thee with fear.

*Katavasia, Tone II:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

“The Christ hath appeared!” the Forerunner crieth out, “And He cometh up to the streams of the Jordan! Let us make haste to greet Him, enlightened by pure thoughts!”

O my God, Thou deliverance of all, having clothed Thyself in mine abundant poverty, Thou approachest to be baptized, seeking me who have strayed from the right path.

Let earth and heaven now join chorus, for the Benefactor of all is baptized, submerging the multitude of our countless transgressions in the waters.

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Standing before God with the angels, O venerable one, in thine entreaty, pray thou for the whole world, that the assaults of the enemy be repelled and that Orthodox Christians be granted victory over their adversaries.

From thy youth thou didst cleave with faith and love unto the Master of the hosts on high, O venerable Seraphim; and, shining forth like the sun in the wilderness of Sarov, thou wast a comfort to those who approached thee in sorrow. Pray thou that we be saved!

To those who pray unto thee, thou hast been shown to be an unshakable pillar and a refuge for those who have recourse unto the Monastery of Sarov, and abundant grace for those who receive healings.

*Theotokion:* Our first mother Eve heard: “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.” And thou, O pure Virgin, hearing: “The Lord is with thee! Rejoice!”, didst put to flight the grief of our first mother with this cry of joy!

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Beseech Christ God, O blessed one, to deliver us from famine and plagues, from sudden death, from secret transgressions and wicked thoughts, that with a pure heart we may cry out to Christ: Save us, O Lord, by the supplications of the venerable one!

Following after Christ the Master in meekness and humility, thou wast all things to all men; tirelessly instructing both rich and poor in piety, thou didst foresee the future as though it were the present. Entreat Christ God, O venerable one, that He grant us remission of our transgressions!

Deliver thy monastery from every assault of the enemy, O venerable one, and fill it with love and grace, that it heed not the cares of this life, but attain unto the goodness and beauty which save the soul.

*Theotokion:* Our trust and hope art thou, O most holy Mistress. Save the suffering Russian land and thy people who pray and call upon thy holy name!

*Katavasia:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

Kontakion of the Forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: “Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!”

*Ikos:* “I do not require thee to transgress the bounds of what is meet, O Baptist; I am not saying unto thee: Tell Me what thou tellest the iniquitous, and what thou teachest sinners. Only baptize Me in silence, awaiting those things which come through baptism; for it is for this cause that thou hast received a dignity which even the angels do not possess; for I have made thee greater than all the prophets. Thus, not one of them beheld Me plainly, but only in images, shadows and reflections; but thou beheldest Me standing before thee. For I am come to save Adam the first-created!”

Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV—

Having utterly overcome the passions of the sea of life by abstinence, and attained unto the haven of dispassion, thou wast revealed as a vessel of abstinence, O venerable Seraphim. Entreat Christ God to grant us great mercy!

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the forefeast, in Tone VIII, Spec. Mel: “Of the shepherds’ pipes...”—

O invisible God, unapproachable Word, Thou wast begotten of the Father in a manner transcending nature and past recounting; and again, in the latter days, without altering what Thou wast, Thou wast born of the Virgin and comest now to be baptized in the flesh in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who as God hast been well pleased to save the race of man.

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The great Forerunner doth marvel at Thine arrival, O Jesus our Benefactor, and in awe he crieth out to Thee: “O Master Who art fire, burn me not who am grass!”

“Beholding Me standing in these waters of Mine own will, O John, do thou now draw nigh and baptize Me, that by water I may fashion grace for the human race!”

“I have come to know Thee in the flesh to be like the sun which covereth itself with clouds. How therefore is it that I now behold Thee naked, clothed in the waters?” John cried out, marvelling.

“Human nature is enlightened and receiveth deliverance from the darkness of sin, and is clothed from on high with the divine vesture of incorruption when I am stripped naked.”

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Today the Monastery of Sarov doth splendidly celebrate thy memory, O venerable one, and doth beseech thee: Entreat the Lord, that He grant peace to the whole world and great mercy for our souls!

In thy great struggles didst thou flourish like a palm-tree, O venerable one, with fruitful words and a blameless life sweetening the hearts of those who have recourse unto thee. Wherefore, pray now that we obtain mercy from Christ our Savior!

By thy supplications entreat God for us, O venerable Seraphim, and drive away the sinful darkness of our grief. Adorn with dispassion, faith and love all that honor thy most glorious memory!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Virgin Mistress, thou beauty of the Churches, might and boast of the suffering Russian land! Pray to Christ God without ceasing, that He preserve us from misfortunes by thy supplications.

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

It is not the Monastery of Sarov alone, but the whole land of Russia which hath thee, O blessed one, as a fervent intercessor and speedy helper, the almighty and invincible defender and mediator for our souls.

Be thou an intercessor and mediator for us before the all-holy Trinity, and the choirs of the saints whose life thou didst emulate, move thou to pray with thee, O venerable one. With them pray for peace and the good estate of the whole world, that we may live a peaceful and quiet life, and in the future may inherit eternal life in this age.

Being great among ascetics, O venerable one, thou didst lead an arduous monastic life in the wilderness, and didst end it in compunctionate prayer. Pray that we be saved!

*Theotokion:* Thou art our refuge and confirmation, O all-pure Theotokos. Entreat thy Son and our God, that He grant us salvation and remission of sins.

*Katavasia:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Crying out, “Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,” the sacred Forerunner appeared out of the desert, renewing those who had grown desolate in evil deeds.

His law and the sacred company of the prophets said of old that the Christ would come, renewing through divine baptism us who wax old through our many transgressions.

“Strange and awesome things do I behold today,” said John, “for now the Wellspring of immortality is come to ask baptism of the least droplet!”

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, I pray Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Unto all who come to thee hast thou been a true teacher and a great intercessor before the Theotokos. And now, O venerable one, cease not to pray for thy children, for thou art possessed of great boldness.

Let the Christian people now enter into the temple of the Monastery of Sarov, bowing down before thy precious relics, O venerable Seraphim, and, glorifying Christ, let them ask healing and salvation of thee.

The invisible enemy desired to affright thee when thou wast praying to God at night, O venerable one. But, defeated by thy prayer, the most wicked one vanished.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Mary, beseech God Who was born of thee, that He grant unto thy servants remission of transgressions.

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Thou didst glorify the Monastery of Sarov with fasting and unceasing prayer, O venerable one, anointing the infirm with oil from the icon of the Theotokos and granting them healing in abundance. Pray thou now that our souls be saved!

O ye hierarchs and priests, rejoice with the monks of Sarov! Ye people, hymn together the blessed father, the calm haven of those who are tempest-tossed by sorrows, the ready healer of infirmities of body and soul.

Offer up thy prayers, O venerable one, as an acceptable and unblemished sacrifice unto the all-holy Trinity, and forget not us that now celebrate thy memory. Beg mercy for those who hate, wrong and are wroth with us, and deliver all from every sorrow.

*Theotokion:* Guide thou my mind, which is tempest-tossed by many passions, O Mistress. Save us that have recourse unto thee, O Theotokos, for beside thee we know none other help, O pure one.

*Katavasia:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of offenses hath surrounded me, O Lord, but lead up my life from corruption, as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, O Lord.

As rain into a fleece of wool do Thou drop down the remission of our offenses, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Who hast drowned the transgressions of those born of earth in the Jordan’s streams, in Thy great mercy.

As an abyss of righteousness, O Christ, Thou now comest forth to the River Jordan to drown the serpent and to wash away the crime of Adam.

“How can the river’s streams hold Thee Who art truly a stream of incorruption, O Christ?” the Forerunner cried out, glorifying Thy great compassion.

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Thy holy soul was a dwelling-place of God, wherein the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit made their abode. Wherefore, we pray thee, O venerable one, dispel the slanders of the enemy from those who honor thee, and grant peace to the suffering land of Russia.

O venerable Seraphim, we honor thy great struggles and labors in the wilderness and the sweetness of thy teaching, whereby thou hast enlightened many who have come to thee and taught them to hymn the consubstantial Trinity.

Following after Christ the Master in purity of life, thou didst complete the good race, O venerable one. Having ascended to the eternal mansions, thou dost behold there what the angels see. Wherefore, honoring thy memory, we glorify Christ.

*Theotokion:* I now flee unto thee, O all-pure one. Save and preserve me by thy supplications. For whatsoever thou desirest, that thou canst accomplish, in that thou art the Mother of the Almighty.

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

We are all full of sin, but thy supplications, O venerable Seraphim, ascend unto the Lord like fragrant incense. And we now pray thee: Still thou the raging tempest of ungodliness in the land of Russia, and ask of the Lord salvation for our souls.

Truly blessed wast thou, O venerable Seraphim, having acquired riches through poverty, and through tears, joy—which thou didst abundantly bestow upon those who came to thee. And now thou dost emit rays of miracles and healest all that have recourse unto thee with faith.

Having dug with thine own hands a well in the wilderness, O venerable one, thou didst give drink unto the thirsty that came unto thee. And now thou healest the diseases of the sick with the water therefrom. Truly, the Master hath shown thee forth unto all as a miraculous intercessor and wonderworker, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* We confess thee to be the Mother of God indeed, the true Theotokos, for by thy birthgiving have we been delivered from the curse of corruption, through the loving-kindness of God, Who loveth mankind, and have been called to life incorruptible.

*Katavasia:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Kontakion, in Tone II—

Forsaking the beauty of the world and the corruption therein, thou didst make thine abode in the Monastery of Sarov. And having lived there as an angel, thou didst become for many a path to salvation. For this cause, Christ hath glorified thee, O father Seraphim, and enriched thee with the gift of healings and miracles. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O our venerable father Seraphim!

*Ikos:* Having forsaken family and friends, and regarding riches as but dust, thou didst make thine abode in the wilderness of Sarov; and having struggled against the passions like one of the bodiless hosts, thou hast been vouchsafed to stand in the angelic choir. Wherefore, having received spiritual knowledge, O venerable one, grant that we also may chant unto thee with understanding, saying: Rejoice, O blessed Seraphim, heavenly man and earthly angel! rejoice, emulator of Christ in thy love! Rejoice, abode of the Holy Spirit! rejoice, great joy of the despondent! Rejoice, source of healing! rejoice, sweet consolation for sorrowful souls! Rejoice, calm haven for monks and all-wise instructor! rejoice, boast of the land of Russia! Rejoice, O our venerable father Seraphim!

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Clothing me in sacred vesture, who have been stripped naked through the counsel of the false one, O Christ, Thou hast come in the richness of Thy goodness to pass naked through the waters. I hymn Thy loving-kindness and worship Thy wondrous providence.

When John beheld Thee naked and commanding that he baptize Thee, he said: “What is this great economy toward us, O Christ? What is this poverty? What is this ineffable descent which passeth understanding?”

Thou didst light Thy precious flesh like a lamp in the midst of the Jordan, O Christ, and didst search for Thine image which had been buried by sin and the passions; and finding it, Thou didst adorn it with Thy baptism, O Good One. Wherefore, we hymn Thee.

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Wondrously was thy life shown to be full of the grace of the divine Spirit, O venerable one. Truly thou didst receive the blessed end of the righteous, rejoicing in Christ. And we cry out to Him Who hath glorified thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Gathering together at thy holy monastery today, a multitude of people doth bow down before thy precious relics, O venerable Seraphim; and we all draw forth healings therefrom, crying out unceasingly: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The report hath gone out into all the world, that a most glorious wonderworker hath appeared in Sarov, pouring forth a multitude of healings upon all who with faith approach and cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, who ineffably gavest birth unto the Word, thy Creator: With the venerable Seraphim beseech Him to have mercy upon our souls!

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Have mercy on us, O Lord, and through the prayers of him who pleased Thee, the venerable Seraphim, preserve us from every soul-corrupting evil, that we may all cry out with compunction: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Who is not astounded, who doth not glorify the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness, O Lord? For Thou hast revealed to the whole world him who pleased Thee, the venerable Seraphim, the fervent intercessor before Thee for us who cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Accept this hymn of thanks which we offer unto thee, O venerable Seraphim, and grant healing unto all of us that keep thy holy memory, that bow down before the shrine of thy relics and cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou art our refuge and confirmation, O all-holy Theotokos. Entreat thy Son and our God to grant us salvation and remission of sins.

*Katavasia:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

John stood forth, the voice of One crying out clearly in the wilderness, turning the hearts of those who have fervently repented to glorify the Savior and Master Who appeared in the Jordan.

“A rushing torrent art Thou, Who fashioned the sea and the wellsprings. And how comest Thou up to the waters? Why seekest Thou cleansing, O Thou Who art the washing and purification of those who hymn Thee, O Christ, for ever?”

Seeking to dry up the streams of the enemy’s malice, to drain the sea of the passions and to pour forth cleansing and remission upon the faithful, O Master, Thou comest to be baptized in the streams of the Jordan.

O Creator of the hours and years, having in Thy loving-kindness come under time, Thou hast shone forth timelessly from the all-unoriginate Father, and hast come to wash away in the streams of the Jordan the transgressions committed throughout all ages.

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Having subdued the passions of the flesh and died to the world, thou didst take the words of eternal life unto thy heart, O blessed one, teaching all who had recourse unto thee to cry out: O ye works, praise ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for ever!

At the glorification of thy precious relics, O venerable one, the Monastery of Sarov was filled with joy; and all the people cried out unto God Who is wondrous in His saints: O ye works, praise ye the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for ever!

Being filled with the grace of the divine Spirit, O venerable Seraphim, in thy supplications ask remission of sins for the faithful people who keep thy holy memory and cry out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt the Lord supremely for ever!

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, who gavest birth unto the Savior and Master of all, thou hast been shown forth to us as the mediatress of salvation; wherefore, we pray thee: Vouchsafe salvation unto all who faithfully hymn thee unto all the ages.

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Hating thy virtuous life, the most wicked foe desired to cause thee to stumble, O venerable one. But having defeated him by the grace of God and the prayers of the Theotokos, thou didst glorify God, singing: O ye works, praise ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for ever!

As flashing lightning illumineth the firmament, so have the reports of thy wonders gone forth throughout all the world, O venerable one. And marvelling at thy glory, we cry out: O ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, exalt the Lord supremely for ever!

Heal thou our minds, which are disquieted by vain and passionate phantasies, O venerable one; still thou the waves of evil disbelief in our land, and strengthen our hearts, which are oppressed by worldly cares, that we may glorify Christ the Creator for ever.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, O ray of immaterial splendor! Rejoice, thou cloud of the radiant Sun of righteousness, Christ our Savior, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages!

*Katavasia:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Seeing Thee, our Benefactor, coming to him and asking baptism of him with humility, John marvelled, astonished, in no wise daring to touch with his hand Thee Who dost touch all the mountains and makest them to smoke.

Like the longed-for swallow heralding a noetic spring, the Baptist hath called forth to those caught up in the deep mid-winter of boundless transgressions who ever endure the blizzard of adverse spirits and evil passions.

With hymns do we magnify Thee, O Lord, as God and Savior, the Effulgence of the glory of the Father, the never-setting Sun Who hast shone forth upon those who sit in the darkness of evil, and art come to enlighten all.

Seeing thy barrenness, O my soul, the axe of death, lying at thy root, threateneth to hew thee down as an unfruitful tree. But cry out to God with fervent repentance: I have sinned against Thee! Save me!

The voice of one crying out hath been heard in the wilderness of our hearts, saying: “Rejoice, for Christ hath come forth, granting remission unto all! Be sanctified, all ye springs and rivers, valleys and mountains, and every place under the sun!”

Canon I to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Accept, and spurn not, our meager tribute, offered unto thee from unworthy lips, O venerable one. Sanctify all who glorify thee, and deliver us from misfortunes, dangers and eternal torments, that we may hymn thee forever.

Bravely enduring the heat of the day and the cold of night in the solitude of the wilderness, thou wast an abode of the Wisdom of God, and didst hasten toward the effulgence which waneth not. Pray thou that we be saved!

This day is the monastery glorified wherein thou didst deign to shoulder the yoke of Christ; for there didst thou spend thy days in the wilderness; and, enlightening by thy teachings the many who came unto thee, thou didst teach them to be children of the Church of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Thou art our strength, thou art our boast and joy, our protectress, help, refuge and invincible intercessor. O most pure Theotokos, save thou thy servants!

Canon II to St. Seraphim

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Emulating the great fathers who of old shone forth in fasting and ascetic struggle, O venerable one, thou didst spend all the days of thy life in prayer, tears and labor, until thou didst attain unto the heavenly mansions. Wherefore, we bless thee as is meet.

With mighty power did Christ God gird thee about and strengthen thee to overcome the wiles of the demons, O venerable one. Wherefore, we now pray thee: Entreat God, the Who loveth mankind, that He deliver us all from the assaults and temptations of the enemies, and save our souls.

In our pain and sorrow we flee to thee, O venerable one, and cry out from the depths of our souls: Be thou a calm haven and ready healer for the sick, and deliver us from every ailment and want, that we may unceasingly magnify thee.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Virgin, thou didst give birth unto One of the Holy Trinity, the Son and Word, Whom do thou entreat with the saints and the righteous in behalf of thy servants who with faith ask remission of sins.

*Katavasia:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion, Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Come, all ye faithful, and with sacred hymns let us praise the venerable Seraphim, wondrous in miracles, the new luminary of the land of Russia, the converser with angels and fervent intercessor before God for those who honor his holy memory!

Glory..., Now and ever..., the exapostilarion of the Forefeast, in the same melody—

The voice of one crying out hath been raised: “Exult, ye mountains! Join chorus, O race of men! for the Word Who is wholly without beginning, Who as a man took flesh upon Himself, is come to be baptized by hands which He fashioned, drowning the sin of the world in the Jordan.

On the Praises, 8 stichera: 4 of the Forefeast, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, O angelic hosts…”—

O hosts of angels, go forth from Bethlehem to the streams of the Jordan! O John, forsaking the desert, go before us all! Rejoice, O river, and make ready! Let all the earth rejoice! Christ cometh to wash away the sin of Adam, for He is compassionate!

With pure mouths and cleansed souls come ye mystically, leaving Bethlehem; and going with Christ to the Jordan, let us hymn Him with gladness, O all ye lands, saying with faith: Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Great and awesome is the mystery, for God hath made Himself like man, though he knew not sin in any wise; and, though innocent, He asketh to be baptized of John in the River Jordan today. Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Having shone forth from the Virgin as the flower of David, Christ hath come to the streams of the Jordan to wash the sins of our first father away in the waters. Dance thou, O Adam! Be glad, O Eve! Let heaven rejoice! And let the people say: Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

And 4 stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII—

The most honored feast of the Monastery of Sarov hath arrived, the memorial of the venerable Seraphim, to whom we now cry out: Rejoice, light and confirmation of ascetics, star like unto that of the magi, showing monks the way to the mansions of heaven, most glorious boast of priests, ever-flowing fountain of love and chastity, most radiant beacon of spiritual discernment! Rejoice, O great model of the virtues! *Twice*

O blessed father Seraphim, thou didst truly follow after Christ, drawing all to thyself by brotherly love and innocence, and teaching man the path of virtue through meekness and humility. Wherefore, with love we bless thy memory, O venerable Seraphim.

Thou didst dwell in the wilderness, O venerable one, and, being filled with divine wisdom, thou didst mount to the summit of virtue. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, adornment of the Church, fair consolation of priests, splendor and boast of monks, O blessed Seraphim! Pray Christ God to grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls!

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Come, ye assemblies of monks and company of ascetics; come, ye multitudes of Christian people! Let us honor the true faster with hymns, crying out: Rejoice, thou who didst traverse the narrow path amid the steps of Christ the Master, thou ready helper of those who come to thee in tribulations and sorrows, O most wondrous mediator of salvation! Rejoice, thou who wast adorned with the gift of prophecy, foretelling the future as though it were the present! Pray thou, O venerable Seraphim, for those who honor thy holy memory with faith and love.

Now and ever..., of the Forefeast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

“O Forerunner John, who knewest Me, the Lamb, while yet in the womb of thy mother, minister unto Me at the river, offer unto Me service with the angels. Stretching forth thy hand, touch the all-pure crown of My head; and when thou seest the mountains smoke and Jordan turn back, cry aloud with them: O Lord, Who wast incarnate of the Virgin for our salvation, glory be to Thee!”

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the Forefeast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the Epistle to the Galatians, §213 \[Gal. 5:22-6:2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, §24 \[Lk. 6:17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

