The 2nd Day Of The Month Of January

Forefeast Of Theophany

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints Sylvester, Pope Of Rome

For This Day We Provide Also The Services For St. Seraphim Of Sarov And St. Juliana Of Lazarevo

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

With piety let us sound forth the hymns of the forefeast of the honorable baptism of our God; for, lo! as a man He desireth to come to His forerunner in the flesh, and to ask for saving baptism unto the edification of all who are enlightened by faith in holiness, becoming partakers of the Spirit.

Christ is shown forth, God appeareth, as David most manifestly wrote beforehand, and He cometh to His servant, asking baptism. O River Jordan, be thou filled with gladness! O earth and sea, mountains and hills, ye hearts of men, exult now, receiving the noetic Light!

How can the river’s streams receive Thee, O Almighty Lord, Who art the River of peace and the Torrent of sustenance, as it is written, Who dost wrap the sky in clouds, dost strip away all the malice of the enemy and clothest mortals in immortality?

And 3 stichera of the hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O holy hierarch, father Sylvester, illumined in sanctity with the light of the priesthood, thou didst enlighten the faithful with radiant teachings, that they may worship the Essence in three Hypostases, the Unity in nature, and thou didst dispel the darkness of heresies. Wherefore, rejoicing, we manifestly celebrate thy luminous memorial today.

O God-bearing father Sylvester, thou wast shown to be a pillar of fire leading the sacred council in sanctity, an overshadowing cloud leading the faithful away from the deception of Egypt and ever guiding them on toward the divine land by thy constant teachings. Wherefore, we honor thy right glorious and most sacred memory.

O divinely eloquent father Sylvester, wondrous in sanctity, with the streams of thy prayers thou didst firmly wall off the serpent of many forms. Thou didst lead a multitude of the heathen to God and didst set at naught the savagery of the Jews, manifestly working great wonders in their sight. Wherefore, we honor and bless thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in Tone VI—

Christ the Truth cometh to the Jordan to be baptized by John; and he saith unto Him: “It is I who must needs be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me? I who am grass dare not touch the Fire! Sanctify me, O Master, by Thy divine epiphany!”

At the aposticha, these stichera of the forefeast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone I—

Splendid was the feast which hath now passed, O Savior, but even more splendid is that which is to come: the former had an angel as its herald, but this one hath found the forerunner to prepare it; on the former Bethlehem lamented like as a mother bereft of her children, when their blood was shed, but this is found to be a fruitful laver through its blessed waters. Then the star announced glad tidings to the magi, but now the Father hath shown Thee to the world. O Lord Who becamest incarnate and now manifestly cometh forth, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

*The composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone II:*

Again my Jesus is washed clean in the Jordan; again doth He expunge our sins! For He truly cometh unto baptism, desiring to wash away the record of Adam’s sin. And He said unto John: “Come thou and perform the first act of the awesome mystery, O Baptist! Come quickly, and extend thy hand: touch thou the head of Him Who hath crushed the head of the serpent and opened paradise, which disobedience shut through the guile of the serpent, the eating of the tree of old!

*Stichos:* The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

*In Tone III:* Luminous was the feast which hath passed, yet even more glorious is this present day: for on the former the magi worshipped the Savior, but on this a glorious servant hath baptized the Master. Then the shepherds, piping, beheld and marvelled, but now the voice of the Father hath proclaimed the only-begotten Son.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Come, all ye faithful, and, forsaking the land of Judæa, let us traverse the wilderness of Jordan; and there shall we behold today Him Who for our sake hath appeared in the flesh, requesting baptism in the streams of the Jordan of the Baptist, who refused, crying aloud in fear: “I dare not touch Fire with my hand of clay! Jordan and the sea fled and turned back, O Savior; and how can I place my hand upon the crown of the head of Thee before Whom the seraphim tremble? Jordan withdrew when Elisha received the mantle of Elijah; how then is it that it hath not sunk into chaos and the nethermost depths, beholding Thee naked in its streams? How is it that it doth not scald me, who am set all afire by Thee?” “Wherefore dost thou hesitate to baptize my Lord, O Baptist?” the Jordan cried out to John. “Why hinderest thou the cleansing of many? Sanctify all creation, and remain Thou also to sanctify me, and the nature of water, for it is for this that Thou hast made Thyself manifest!”

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV—

The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, a model of meekness and teacher of abstinence. Wherefore, thou didst attain the heights through humility, and riches through poverty. O father Sylvester, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Make ready, O Zebulun! Adorn thyself, O Naphtali! O River Jordan, leaping up, receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! Rejoice, O Adam, with our first mother! Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; for He that beheld you naked hath revealed Himself, that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!

At Compline

We chant a triodion, in which the irmoi are chanted twice, and the troparia repeated to make up the number 6, whereupon both choirs together chant the irmos once. In those odes which correspond with the odes of the diodion, the irmos of the first canon is chanted twice, and the troparia repeated to make up the number 6, whereupon both choirs together chant the irmos of the diodion.

Ode I

Triodion, the acrostic whereof is: “The second”, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord Who by His divine command dried up the impassable and turbulent sea, and guided the people of Israel across it on foot, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

*Refrain:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

The ineffable condescension of the Creator, Who shone forth of old from the Virgin, hath illumined the world; and, working another mystery now, Christ cometh Himself to the Jordan for the awesome regeneration of mortals.

Ministering unto an awesome work, the Forerunner, the voice of the Word, now cometh forth to the Jordan, enriching impoverished Adam with divinity; for Christ cometh, making all rich with the Spirit through the gift of baptism.

Ode VIII

Triodion

*Irmos:* The bodies of the pious youths, clad in the same purity as their souls, quivered with awe, and the irresistible fire, though fed with boundless fuel, recoiled; but as the ever-living flame faded away, an everlasting hymn was chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Christ the Word said to those abiding in the slothfulness of despondency: “I shall acknowledge you, My chosen vessels, when the seal of My gift is impressed upon you, shining forth thrice-radiant light unto baptism; for therein will I grant the way of salvation, therein do I give to all the life of freedom.”

“That which now is being done is contrary to the order of nature; for I who am baser require the blessing of Thee Who art higher. Wherefore, I am afraid to touch Thy head, O Deliverer,” the forerunner cried, “for it is not fitting that fire come in contact with grass! Yet do Thou enlighten me, Thy servant!”

Diodion, the acrostic whereof is: “The third”, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Refusing to obey the edict of the tyrant, the three venerable children were cast into the furnace, and confessed God, chanting: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Shaking off the soul’s sleep of despondency by vigilance of heart, let us cry out to Him Who cometh to purify men’s souls in the streams: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!

Instead of Glory…, we say: We bless the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit: the Lord.

Let the activity of the soul suffice in us for lofty vision, that, revealed as twice radiant, we may appear before the Master Who cleanseth all with divine streams.

And before the last troparion we say: Now & ever…

Having increased our talant for the Master through active discourse in twofold activity, O ye faithful, as servants let us offer it with faith to the Master Who gave it to us and Who cometh to be baptized for the restoration of men’s souls.

Then, descending, we chant: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, hymning and exalting Him supremely for all ages.

And we repeat the irmos of the diodion: Refusing to obey the tyrant’s edict…

Ode IX

Triodion

*Irmos:* Thou hast magnified the Theotokos Who gave Thee birth, O Christ our Creator, through whom Thou didst clothe Thyself in a body subject to passions like ours, but which looseth our transgressions. Blessing her, all of us, the generations of men, magnify Thee.

Having shaken off all the defilement of the passions, noetically receive the image of divine baptism as is meet; for the Creator cometh to bestow strange cleansing, being baptized in the streams, and to show forth unto all a new transformation.

Looking to Christ, Who willingly humbled Himself even to assume the form of a servant, let us now humble ourselves beneath His mighty hand, caught up in the Spirit, that with pure works we may honor Him Who is baptized.

Diodion

*Irmos:* We hymn thee, O Virgin Theotokos who didst contain the uncontainable God in thy womb, and hast given birth to Joy for the world.

Having put aside all the darkness of sin, to the Master Who cleanseth all with divine streams let us show ourselves to be pure.

Come, and having cleansed ourselves with the streams of tears, let us draw nigh unto Christ Who cometh to be baptized in the River Jordan.

Instead of “It is truly meet…”, we chant the irmos of the diodion: We hymn thee, O Virgin Theotokos…, and make a prostration.

After the Trisagion, the kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: “Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!”

This is chanted at all Compline services until the feast itself.

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the forefeast, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the forefeast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Having clothed Thyself in my poverty, O my Jesus, mingling with Thy servants Thou comest forth, requesting baptism from a servant, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, beholding Thee, John cried aloud: “How can I baptize Thee Who art wholly without defilement, O all-good God?”

Glory…, Now & ever…: Another sessional hymn, in the same melody—

In His goodness Christ cometh forth to the streams of the River Jordan, and therein He desireth to accomplish our salvation through grace. O godly Forerunner, receive Him, rejoicing, and in the waters wash Him Who hath desired to be baptized and alone loveth mankind.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

The Rich One, having beggared Himself in His great loving-kindness, and desiring to enrich us who once made ourselves beggars through intemperance, cometh forth to enter the streams of the Jordan and to be baptized openly by John. O ye faithful, let us hymn His utter humility!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Another sessional hymn, in the same melody—

Today have the words of Isaiah been fulfilled: The voice is heard of one crying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord and make straight His paths. For the great John, who loved the wilderness, hath sounded forth, as the prophet said, like a clarion, summoning all. Wherefore, together let us hasten and behold the most glorious deeds.

Canon of the forefeast, with 8 troparia, including the irmos, which is chanted twice; and that of the holy hierarch, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the \[Greek\] alphabet, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord Who by His divine command dried up the impassable and turbulent sea, and guided the people of Israel across it on foot, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

The divine Forerunner, who knoweth the advent of the Lord, emergeth from the desert, crying out with splendor: “Our deliverance hath drawn nigh and appeared! Repent ye, and cleanse yourselves with water!”

O Word, Who with the Father art equally without beginning, with the immersion of repentance which is Thy baptism cleanse me wholly who am engulfed in a flood of sins; and ever grant deliverance unto the faithful, for the sake of Thine infinite loving-kindness.

The land of Zebulun, as it is written, beholding the unwaning Light, was enlightened; for, lo! He is come to the streams of the Jordan! And it hymneth God Who is over all, crying out: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

The divinely eloquent Forerunner, seeing all the people who had come, exclaimed to them: “Who hath told you to flee from the coming wrath? Show forth fruits of repentance, O ye who are saved by grace!”

Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “Grant me the grace to hymn thee with faith, O blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Having through grace been adopted as a son by God the Father, embraced a life of purity, and been seen to be illumined in soul with divine splendors, O Sylvester, thou hast passed over to the Light which waneth not, crying: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

With the magnitude of thine intellect thou didst suppress the passions, and by a life of fasting thou didst make thy flesh subject to thy spirit, O wise one, becoming a divine and splendid habitation of the Trinity; and thou didst bring low the spirits of wickedness, singing to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Submitting to the divine law in godly manner, and adorned with an understanding of the divinely inspired Scriptures, thou didst truly teach the sages of the Greeks to confess Christ with the Father and the Spirit; and they chant: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

O Sylvester, thou didst preach the incarnate Christ, Who is known to be in a single Hypostasis, is understood to be of two wills and activities, and hath deified thee who with faith cry out to Him: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

*Theotokion:* That He might unite those below with those on high, the one God of all descended into the womb of her who knew not wedlock and appeared in fleshly form; and breaking down the middle-wall of enmity, He hath brought about peace and bestowed life and divine deliverance.

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

“The Christ hath appeared!” the Forerunner crieth out, “And He cometh up to the streams of the Jordan! Let us make haste to greet Him, enlightened by pure thoughts!”

O my God, Thou deliverance of all, having clothed Thyself in mine abundant poverty, Thou approachest to be baptized, seeking me who have strayed from the right path.

Let earth and heaven now join chorus, for the Benefactor of all is baptized, submerging the multitude of our countless transgressions in the waters.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Plant Thou the fear of Thee in the hearts of Thy servants, O Lord, and be Thou the confirmation of us who call upon Thee in truth.

Having acquired purity of mind, thou becamest a hierarch, receiving holy anointing; wherefore, we praise thee, O God-bearing father.

With the demonstration of thy discourses thou didst show forth God the Word, Who in the flesh stretched forth His hands upon the Cross, and thou didst destroy the savagery of the Jews, O most blessed one.

As one great in miracles, O divinely wise Sylvester, thou drivest away evil spirits and dost wash away infirmities for those who petition thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst remain a pure virgin even after giving birth, O most holy one, for thou gavest birth to God, Who made Himself like unto us in all things save sin.

Kontakion of the hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

As a converser with the ascetics, thou becamest a priest among the priests of God the King; wherefore, thou rejoicest now with the angelic choirs. O father Sylvester, thou God-bearing shepherd, dwelling in the heavens, save those who with love celebrate thy memory.

Sessional hymn of the hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having been shown to be a river of piety, as a divine hierarch thou didst water all the earth with the streams of thy doctrines, O Sylvester, and with the showers of thy miracles thou didst wash away the defilement of the passions, and hast inherited a torrent of sustenance, as is meet. Wherefore, assembling, we piously honor thee today with hymns and cry out to thee with faith: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the forefeast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Of the piping shepherds…”—

O invisible God, unapproachable Word, Thou wast begotten of the Father in a manner transcending nature and past recounting; and again, in the latter days, without altering what Thou wast, Thou wast born of the Virgin and comest now to be baptized in the flesh in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who as God hast been well pleased to save the race of man.

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The great Forerunner doth marvel at Thine arrival, O Jesus our Benefactor, and in awe he crieth out to Thee: “O Master Who art fire, burn me not who am grass!”

“Beholding Me standing in these waters of Mine own will, O John, do thou now draw nigh and baptize Me, that by water I may fashion grace for the human race!”

“I have come to know Thee in the flesh to be like the sun which covereth itself with clouds. How therefore is it that I now behold Thee naked, clothed in the waters?” John cried out, marvelling.

“Human nature is enlightened and receiveth deliverance from the darkness of sin, and is clothed from on high with the divine vesture of incorruption when I am stripped naked.”

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

O most sacred father Sylvester, as a God-pleasing hierarch thou wast shown to ordain priests by the Holy Spirit and to illumine the people.

Dispelling infirmities by the coöperation of the Spirit, thou didst heal incurable diseases, O thou who art most rich, turning the lost away from error.

Thou didst dispel the falsehood of heresies, O Sylvester, and didst tend thy flock by the waters of piety, in the meadow of divine knowledge.

The grace of the divine Spirit poured forth from thy lips; wherefore, God anointed thee as a priest for His people, O most blessed father.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the wounds of my heart, O Maiden, and direct the movements of my soul toward the desire for God, O Virgin.

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Crying out, “Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,” the sacred Forerunner appeared out of the desert, renewing those who had grown desolate in evil deeds.

His law and the sacred company of the prophets said of old that the Christ would come, renewing through divine baptism us who wax old through our many transgressions.

“Strange and awesome things do I behold today,” said John, “for now the Wellspring of immortality is come to ask baptism of the least droplet!”

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

With the cords of thy discourses thou didst loose all the bonds of vainglory, O father, and didst bind to the divine Faith those who were bound by falsehood, opening their minds through the reading of the Scriptures, O blessed father, holy hierarch.

Thy heart was blameless in the justifications of our common Master, O father; and, desiring Him, thou didst restrain the flesh. And, enriched by the grace of miracles, thou healest infirmities and the grievous wounds of the soul.

With the ready remedies of thy discourses, like a physician thou didst cure the afflicted hearts of those infected with the soul-destroying sickness of the bitter heresy of Manes, O God-bearer, and by divine grace thou didst drive it away from those who are pure of heart.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O thou who alone gavest birth to the Almighty Who abased Himself in assuming the flesh! Rejoice, O most immaculate one, thou restoration of the fallen world! Rejoice, O dispelling of grief! Rejoice, salvation of the faithful! Rejoice, O most exalted throne of God!

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of offenses hath surrounded me, O Lord, but lead up my life from corruption, as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, O Lord.

As rain into a fleece of wool do Thou drop down the remission of our offenses, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Who hast drowned the transgressions of those born of earth in the Jordan’s streams, in Thy great mercy.

As an abyss of righteousness, O Christ, Thou now comest forth to the River Jordan to drown the serpent and to wash away the crime of Adam.

“How can the river’s streams hold Thee Who art truly a stream of incorruption, O Christ?” the Forerunner cried out, glorifying Thy great compassion.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

By thy supplications, O blessed one, thou hast shut up in everlasting imprisonment, beyond hope of escape, the wicked serpent who destroyeth those consumed by jealousy; and thou hast set the sign of the Cross upon the gates and bars thereof.

The sound of thy mellifluous words hath gone forth unto all men, O most blessed one, and the splendor thy teachings, the radiance of thy miracles and the divine manifestation of thy works have shone upon all the ends of the world.

Thou hast richly poured forth in showers divine healings and the gifts of the Creator of all, O most blessed and holy hierarch, that thou mightest ever heal with the grace of the most Holy Spirit those who approach thee with pure faith.

*Theotokion:* Perceiving the depth of thy mystery, O Virgin, the divinely eloquent prophets, instructed by the divine Spirit, proclaimed thee in prophecy; and, beholding the fulfillment thereof, we now all-joyously believe on thee.

Kontakion of the Forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: “Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!”

*Ikos:* “I do not require thee to transgress the bounds of what is meet, O Baptist; I am not saying unto thee: Tell Me what thou tellest the iniquitous, and what thou teachest sinners. Only baptize Me in silence, awaiting those things which come through baptism; for it is for this cause that thou hast received a dignity which even the angels do not possess; for I have made thee greater than all the prophets. Thus, not one of them beheld Me plainly, but only in images, shadows and reflections; but thou beheldest Me standing before thee. For I am come to save Adam the first-created!”

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Clothing me in sacred vesture, who have been stripped naked through the counsel of the false one, O Christ, Thou hast come in the richness of Thy goodness to pass naked through the waters. I hymn Thy loving-kindness and worship Thy wondrous providence.

When John beheld Thee naked and commanding that he baptize Thee, he said: “What is this great economy toward us, O Christ? What is this poverty? What is this ineffable descent which passeth understanding?”

Thou didst light Thy precious flesh like a lamp in the midst of the Jordan, O Christ, and didst search for Thine image which had been buried by sin and the passions; and finding it, Thou didst adorn it with Thy baptism, O Good One. Wherefore, we hymn Thee.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Like a palm-tree in the house of the Lord didst thou put forth the fruit of righteousness, O father, wherewith those who honor thee are nourished, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

With the mighty manifestations of thy discourses thou didst denounce the vain-minded who were afflicted with unbelief, O all-glorious Sylvester, and, rejoicing, thou chantest: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thy glory abideth forever, O father, and thy memory is with all the righteous. With them be thou mindful of us who chant with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Illumined with the radiance of the Spirit, the glorious Sylvester dispelled the darkness of evil and hath illumined all who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O all-wondrous Maiden, for us thou hast given birth to Him Who hath existed from before the beginning of time, and Who, in His extreme loving-kindness, hath made Himself like unto us, that He might save those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

John stood forth, the voice of One crying out clearly in the wilderness, turning the hearts of those who have fervently repented to glorify the Savior and Master Who appeared in the Jordan.

“A rushing torrent art Thou, Who fashioned the sea and the wellsprings. And how comest Thou up to the waters? Why seekest Thou cleansing, O Thou Who art the washing and purification of those who hymn Thee, O Christ, for ever?”

Seeking to dry up the streams of the enemy’s malice, to drain the sea of the passions and to pour forth cleansing and remission upon the faithful, O Master, Thou comest to be baptized in the streams of the Jordan.

O Creator of the hours and years, having in Thy loving-kindness come under time, Thou hast shone forth timelessly from the all-unoriginate Father, and hast come to wash away in the streams of the Jordan the transgressions committed throughout all ages.

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Theologizing concerning the single essence of the one Godhead, O father, thou didst unceasingly hymn Him Who is known in three Persons, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast called a true teacher of the Truth, O father; wherefore, thou didst denounced the falsehood of lying deceit, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst show thyself to be the leader of the sacred council, O initiate of the sacred mysteries, and didst adorn the cathedra of the preëminent of the disciples, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst adorn thy heart with divine virtues, O father, and, wholly adorned, didst join with the ranks on high, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Following thy divine words, we, the generations of men, bless thee, the ever-blessed one, and chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Seeing Thee, our Benefactor, coming to him and asking baptism of him with humility, John marvelled, astonished, in no wise daring to touch with his hand Thee Who dost touch all the mountains and makest them to smoke.

Like the longed-for swallow heralding a noetic spring, the Baptist hath called forth to those caught up in the deep mid-winter of boundless transgressions who ever endure the blizzard of adverse spirits and evil passions.

With hymns do we magnify Thee, O Lord, as God and Savior, the Effulgence of the glory of the Father, the never-setting Sun Who hast shone forth upon those who sit in the darkness of evil, and art come to enlighten all.

Seeing thy barrenness, O my soul, the axe of death, lying at thy root, threateneth to hew thee down as an unfruitful tree. But cry out to God with fervent repentance: I have sinned against Thee! Save me!

The voice of one crying out hath been heard in the wilderness of our hearts, saying: “Rejoice, for Christ hath come forth, granting remission unto all! Be sanctified, all ye springs and rivers, valleys and mountains, and every place under the sun!”

Canon of the Hierarch

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

In diligently sacrificing thyself through the mortification of the passions, O most blessed one, thou becamest an offering right acceptable to Him Who was slain for our sake.

As one preëminent in godliness among the sacred fathers, thou didst establish the sacred doctrine and didst shut the ungodly mouths of the heretics.

Thou hast joined the choirs of the incorporeal ones, O holy hierarch, having in thy body splendidly vanquished the incorporeal foe.

Thy memory hath shone forth upon the world like the radiant sun, O holy hierarch and father, shedding light upon those who praise thee with faith.

*Theotokion:* O right beloved Virgin who gavest birth to the good God and Lord, bless thou my soul, which hath been oppressed by sins.

Exapostilarion of the forefeast: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

The voice of one crying out hath been raised: “Exult, ye mountains! Join chorus, O race of men! for the Word Who is wholly without beginning, Who as a man took flesh upon Himself, is come, to be baptized by hands which He fashioned, drowning the sin of the world in the Jordan.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Another exapostilarion—

How can the river’s streams receive Thee Who didst create the rivers and seas out of nothing, O Thou Who lovest mankind? How doth the Forerunner dare to set his hand upon Thine all-pure head, O Master? In trembling, we hymn the height of thy poverty, O Word!

On the Praises, 4 stichera, the acrostic whereof is: “The hymns of Theophanes for the Enlightenment”, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, O angelic hosts…”—

O hosts of angels, go forth from Bethlehem to the streams of the Jordan! O John, forsaking the desert, go before us all! Rejoice, O river, and make ready! Let all the earth rejoice! Christ cometh to wash away the sin of Adam, for He is compassionate!

With pure mouths and cleansed souls come ye mystically, leaving Bethlehem; and going with Christ to the Jordan, let us hymn Him with gladness, O all ye lands, saying with faith: Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Great and awesome is the mystery, for God hath made Himself like man, though he knew not sin in any wise; and, though innocent, He asketh to be baptized of John in the River Jordan today. Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Having shone forth from the Virgin as the flower of David, Christ hath come to the streams of the Jordan to wash the sins of our first father away in the waters. Dance thou, O Adam! Be glad, O Eve! Let heaven rejoice! And let the people say: Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Glory…, in the same melody—

The hand of John doth tremble, and, though he feareth to touch Thee, he rejoiceth in soul, mindful that it was Thy good pleasure to bow Thy head, having taken on the form of a servant, that from slavery to the enemy Thou mightest deliver men who cry: Blessed art Thou Who hast come! O our God, glory to Thee!

Now & ever…, in the same melody—

Let the whole earth now mystically rejoice prophetically, and let the mountains exult! Turn back thy streams, O Jordan, as it is written! Stand in awe before the face of the Master Who as God became man, for He hath come to purify all men of the sin of Adam!

At the aposticha, these stichera idiomela, in Tone VI—

More splendid than the sun was the feast of the nativity of Christ which hath passed, but brilliant and all-radiant is the coming feast of His divine epiphany also shown to be. For that one, the shepherds and angels, rendering glory, worshipped God Who had become man; but on this one John, touching the Master with his right hand, saith with trembling: “Hallow me and the waters, O Thou Who alone hast great mercy!”

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

Make ready, O River Jordan! For, lo! Christ God cometh to be baptized by John, that in thy waters He might crush the heads of the invisible serpents by His divinity! Rejoice, O desert of Jordan! Ye mountains, exult in gladness; for our eternal Life cometh to restore Adam! O Forerunner John, thou art the voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Prepare ye the ways of the Lord and make straight His paths!”

*Stichos:* The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

Let the desert of Jordan rejoice, and let it blossom like a lily; for therein hath been heard the voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Prepare ye the way of the Lord!” For He Who set forth the mountains with a measure and the forested places with His scales, Who as God filleth all things, is baptized by a servant, granting rich gifts at the beginning of His impoverishment. Eve once heard: “In pain thou shalt give birth to children”; but now the Virgin hath heard: “Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee, Who hath great mercy!”

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

“O Forerunner John, who knewest Me, the Lamb, while yet in the womb of thy mother, minister unto Me at the river, offer unto Me service with the angels. Stretching forth thy hand, touch the all-pure crown of My head; and when thou seest the mountains smoke and Jordan turn back, cry aloud with them: O Lord, Who wast incarnate of the Virgin for our salvation, glory be to Thee!”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the forefeast.

After the entrance, the troparion of the forefeast, that of the temple \(if it is dedicated to the Theotokos\), or that of the saint to whom the temple is dedicated; then the troparion of the saint of the day. Kontakion of the temple \(if dedicated to the Theotokos\), that of the saint to whom the temple is dedicated; Glory…, that of the saint of the day; Now & ever…, that of the forefeast.

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318 \[Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\]

Brethren: Such a high priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the *people:* for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to John, § 50 \[Jn. 15: 1-7\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “I am the true Vine, and My Father is the Husbandman. Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit He taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, He pruneth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in Me. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: He who abideth in Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without Me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

