The Order Of The Hours Chanted On The Eve Of The Theophany Of The Lord

When the Theophany of the Lord falleth on Sunday or Monday, we chant the Royal Hours on the morning of the preceding Friday. But when the Theophany falleth on any other day, we chant the Royal Hours on the morning of the eve of Theophany.

The First Hour

At the beginning of the second hour \[i.e., 8 o’clock in the morning\], the bells are rung. When we have assembled in church, the priest vesteth in epitrachelion and phelonion, and the deacon in sticharion. The paraecclesiarch setteth forth an analogion, suitably adorned, facing the royal doors, and he lighteth a candle on a candle-stand. The priest entereth the nave of the church, or the refectory, through the royal doors, the deacon preceding him and bearing a censer. The priest setteth the Holy Gospel on the analogion and, standing before the analogion, intoneth the usual beginning: “Blessed is our God…” The reader respondeth: “Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee!”, “O heavenly King…”, and the rest. And after the exclamation \[following the Lord’s Prayer\], the priest censeth round the analogion on which the Holy Gospel resteth, and then censeth the rest of the icons, the whole temple, the superior and the brethren. And the reader readeth:

Psalm 5

Unto my words give ear, O Lord; hear my cry. Attend unto the voice of my supplication, O my King and my God; for unto Thee will I pray, O Lord. In the morning Thou shalt hear my voice. In the morning shall I stand before Thee, and Thou shalt look upon me; for not a God that willest iniquity art Thou. He that worketh evil shall not dwell near Thee, nor shall transgressors abide before Thine eyes. Thou hast hated all those who work iniquity; Thou shalt destroy all those who speak a lie. A man that is bloody and deceitful shall the Lord abhor. But as for me, in the multitude of Thy mercy shall I go into Thy house; I shall worship toward Thy holy temple in fear of Thee. O Lord, guide me in the way of Thy righteousness; because of mine enemies, make straight my way before Thee, For in their mouth there is no truth; their heart is vain. Their throat is an open sepulchre, with their tongues have they spoken deceitfully; judge them, O God. Let them fall down on account of their own devisings; according to the multitude of their ungodliness, cast them out, for they have embittered Thee, O Lord. And let all them be glad that hope in Thee; they shall ever rejoice, and Thou shalt dwell among them. And all shall glory in Thee that love Thy name, for Thou shalt bless the righteous. O Lord, as with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us.

Psalm 22

The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green pasture, there hath He made me to dwell; beside the water of rest hath He nurtured me. He hath converted my soul, He hath led me on the paths of righteousness for His name’s sake. For though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff, they have comforted me. Thou hast prepared a table before me in the presence of those who afflict me. Thou hast anointed my head with oil, and Thy cup which filleth me, how excellent it is! And Thy mercy shall pursue me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord unto length of days.

Psalm 26

The Lord is my light and my savior; whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid? When the wicked draw nigh against me to eat my flesh, those who afflict me and are mine enemies, they themselves became weak and they fell. Though a host should array itself against me, my heart shall not be afraid; though war should rise up against me, in this have I hoped. One thing have I asked of the Lord, this will I seek after: That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, that I may behold the delight of the Lord, and that I may visit His holy temple. For He hid me in His tabernacle in the day of my troubles, He sheltered me in the secret place of His tabernacle, upon a rock hath He exalted me. And now, behold, He exalted my head above mine enemies. I went round about and I sacrificed in His tabernacle a sacrifice of praise and jubilation; I will sing and I will chant unto the Lord. Hearken, O Lord, unto my voice, wherewith I cried; have mercy on me, and hearken unto me. My heart said unto Thee: I will seek the Lord. My face hath sought after Thee; Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. Turn not Thy face from me and turn not away in wrath from Thy servant. Be Thou my helper; cast me not utterly away, and forsake me not, O God my Savior. For my father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord hath taken me to Himself. Set me a law, O Lord, in Thy way, and lead me in the right path because of mine enemies. Deliver me not over unto the souls of those who afflict me, for unjust witnesses are risen up against me, and injustice hath lied to itself. I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living. Wait on the Lord; be thou manful, and let thy heart be strengthened, and wait on the Lord.

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Glory…: Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

Once, the River Jordan was turned back by the mantle of Elisha when Elijah was borne aloft, and the waters were parted on either side, and the path which before was wet became dry for him, as a true image of baptism, whereby we pass through the flow of life. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

What shall we call thee, O thou who art full of grace? Heaven, for thou hast shone forth upon us the Sun of righteousness. Paradise, for thou hast put forth the Flower of immortality. Pure Mother, for thou didst have in thy holy embrace the Son Who is God of all. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

Then these stichera, the composition of Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, are each chanted twice—

*In Tone VIII:* Today the nature of the waters is sanctified: the Jordan parteth and turneth back the streams of its waters, beholding the Master baptized.

And the second choir also chanteth the foregoing sticheron, without any stichos.

Then the first choir, resuming, chanteth the stichos:

Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

O Christ our King, Thou hast come as a man to the river, and dost hasten to receive the baptism of a servant at the hand of the Forerunner because of our sins, O Good One Who lovest mankind.

And the second choir chanteth the second stichos:

The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

Then, the foregoing sticheron is repeated.

Glory…, in the same tone—

To the voice of one crying in the wilderness “Prepare ye the way of the Lord!” didst Thou come, O Lord, having assumed the guise of a servant, asking baptism, although Thou knewest not sin. The waters saw Thee and were afraid, and the Forerunner trembled and cried out, saying: “How can I enlighten the Beacon of light? How can a servant set his hand upon his Master? Sanctify me and the waters, O Savior Who takest away the sin of the world!”

Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Then, the prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The voice of the Lord hath thundered from heaven, the Most High hath given forth His voice.

*Stichos:* I will love Thee, O Lord, my strength; the Lord is my confirmation.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: “Be glad, thou thirsty desert: let the wilderness exult and flower as the lily.” And the desert places of Jordan shall blossom and rejoice; the glory of Lebanon hath been given unto it, and the honor of Carmel; and my people shall see the glory of the Lord and the majesty of God. Be strong, ye feeble hands and palsied knees. Comfort one another, ye faint-hearted; be strong, fear not. Behold, our God rendereth judgment, and He will render it; He will come and save us. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear. Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the stammerers shall speak plainly: for water hath burst forth in the desert, and a channel of water in a thirsty land. And the dry land shall become pools, and a fountain of water shall be poured into the thirsty land; there shall there be a joy of birds, ready habitations and marshes. There shall be there a pure way, and it shall be called a holy way; and there shall not pass by there any unclean person, neither shall there be there an unclean way; but the dispersed shall walk on it, and they shall not go astray. And there shall be no lion there, neither shall any evil beast go up upon it, nor at all be found there; but the redeemed and gathered on the Lord’s behalf shall walk in it, and shall return, and come to Sion with joy, and everlasting joy shall be over their head; for on their head shall be praise and exultation, and joy shall take possession of them: sorrow and pain, and groaning have fled away.

Acts of the Apostles, § 33 \[Acts 13: 25-33\]

In those days, as John fulfilled his course, he said: “Whom think ye that I am? I am not he. But, behold, there cometh One after me, Whose shoes of His feet I am not worthy to loose.” Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. For those who dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew Him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning Him. And though they found no cause of death in Him, yet desired they Pilate that He should be slain. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of Him, they took Him down from the Tree, and laid Him in a sepulchre. But God raised Him from the dead: and He was seen many days by those who came up with Him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are His witnesses unto the people.

*Deacon:* Wisdom, stand aright! Let us listen to the Holy Gospel.

*Priest:* Peace be unto all.

*People:* And to thy spirit.

*Priest:* A reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew, §5 \[Mt. 3: 1-11\]

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judæa, And saying: “Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For this is He Who was spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, saying: ‘The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight.’” And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his food was locusts and wild honey. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judæa, and all the region round about Jordan, And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them: “O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: and think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but He Who cometh after me is mightier than I, Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit, and with fire.”

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

My steps do Thou direct according to Thy saying, and let no iniquity have dominion over me. Deliver me from the false accusation of men, and I will keep Thy commandments. Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant, and teach me Thy statutes.

Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may hymn Thy glory and Thy majesty all the day long.

Then, Trisagion through Our Father… Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!

Lord, have mercy! *Forty times*

O Christ God, Thou Long-suffering, greatly Merciful and exceedingly Compassionate One, Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped and glorified; Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on the sinful; Who callest all to salvation in the promise of good things to come: do Thou Thyself, O Lord, accept also our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies; set our minds aright; and cleanse our thoughts. And deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. Protect us by Thy holy angels, that, preserved and guided by their array, we may attain unto the unity of the Faith and to the understanding of Thine unapproachable glory: for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…

We magnify thee, the Theotokos, who art more honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the seraphim, and without corruption gavest birth to God the Word.

In the name of the Lord, father, bless!

*Priest:* O God, have pity on us and bless us; cause Thy face to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.

Then, the reader readeth this prayer—

O Christ, Thou true Light Who enlightenest and sanctifiest every man who cometh into the world: let the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us, that therein we may behold the unapproachable light; and guide our steps to the doing of Thy commandments, through the supplications of Thine all-pure Mother and of all Thy saints. Amen.

The Third Hour

At the beginning of the Third and Sixth Hours, the deacon censeth only the Gospel, the iconostasis, the superior and the choirs.

*Reader:* O come, let us worship… *Thrice*

Psalm 28

Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the sons of rams; bring unto the Lord glory and honor. Bring unto the Lord the glory due unto His name, worship the Lord in His holy court. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of glory hath thundered, the Lord is upon the many waters. The voice of the Lord in might, the voice of the Lord in majesty, The voice of the Lord Who breaketh the cedars, yea, the Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon. And He will break them small like the calf of Lebanon, and His beloved is like a son of the unicorns. The voice of the Lord Who divideth the flame of fire, The voice of the Lord Who shaketh the wilderness, yea, the Lord will shake the wilderness of Kaddis. The voice of the Lord gathereth the harts, and shall reveal the thickets of oak, and in His temple every man uttereth glory. The Lord dwelleth in the flood, yea, the Lord shall sit as king for ever. The Lord will give strength unto His people; the Lord will bless His people with peace.

Psalm 41

As the heart panteth after the fountains of water, so panteth my soul after Thee, O God. My soul thirsted for God, the mighty, the living; when shall I come, and appear before the face of God? My tears have been my bread by day and by night, whilst it is said to me daily: Where is thy God? These things have I remembered, and I poured out my soul within me, for I shall go to the place of the wondrous tabernacle, even to the house of God, with a voice of rejoicing and thanksgiving, yea, of the sound of those who keep festival. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why dost thou disquiet me? Hope in God, for I will give thanks unto Him; He is the salvation of my countenance, and my God. Within me my soul hath been troubled; therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem, from the little mountain. Deep calleth unto deep, at the voice of Thy cataracts; all Thy billows and Thy waves have passed over me. By day the Lord will command His mercy, and by night His ode shall be with me, my prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God: Thou art my helper. Why hast Thou forgotten me? And wherefore go I with downcast face whilst mine enemy afflicteth me? Whilst my bones were broken, mine enemies reproached me; whilst they said to me daily: Where is thy God? Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why dost thou disquiet me? Hope in God, for I will give thanks unto Him; He is the salvation of my countenance, and my God.

Psalm 50

Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good pleasure unto Sion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Glory…: Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

Once, the River Jordan was turned back by the mantle of Elisha when Elijah was borne aloft, and the waters were parted on either side, and the path which before was wet became dry for him, as a true image of baptism, whereby we pass through the flow of life. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We beseech thee, O Mistress: Pray thou with the holy apostles, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Then these stichera—

*In Tone VIII:* The right hand of the Forerunner and Baptist, the prophet honored above all other prophets, trembled when he beheld Thee, the Lamb of God Who purifieth the world of offenses; and, overwhelmed by the nature of the feat required of him, he cried aloud: “I dare not touch Thy head, O Word! Do Thou Thyself sanctify and illumine me, O Compassionate One, for Thou art the life, light and peace of the world!” *Twice*

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

*In Tone IV:* The Trinity, our God, hath been revealed unto us today; for the Father hath given utterance to manifest testimony as to His kinship, and the Spirit hath descended from the heavens in the guise of a dove, while the Son hath bowed His all-pure head before the Forerunner and, being baptized, hath delivered the human race from bondage, in that He loveth mankind.

And the second choir chanteth the second Stichos:

The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

Then, the foregoing sticheron is repeated.

Glory…, in Tone V—

The Lord, the Bestower of life, cometh to the Jordan in the flesh, desiring to be baptized in human form, in that He is compassionate; that, delivering from every machination and snare of the serpent us who have been deceived, He Who is borne witness to by the Father might illumine us. And the divine Spirit appeared with Him in the guise of a dove. Cause Him to dwell within our souls, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Prokimenon, in Tone VI—

The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

*Stichos:* With my voice unto the Lord have I cried, with my voice unto God, and He was attentive unto me.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah \[Is. 1: 16-20\]

Thus saith the Lord: Wash ye, be ye clean; remove your iniquities from your souls before Mine eyes; cease from your iniquities; learn to do well; diligently seek judgment, deliver the one who is suffering wrong, plead for the orphan, and obtain justice for the widow. And, come, let us reason together, saith the Lord: and though your sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will make them white as wool. And if ye be willing, and hearken to Me, ye shall eat the good of the land: but if ye be not willing, nor hearken to Me, a sword shall devour you: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this.

A Reading from the Acts of the Holy Apostles \[§42\]

In those days, it came to pass that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper borders came to Ephesus and, finding certain disciples, he said unto them: “Have ye received the Holy Spirit, since ye believed?” And they said unto him: “We have not so much as heard whether there is any Holy Spirit.” And he said to them: “Unto what, then, were ye baptized?” And they said: “Unto John’s baptism.” Then said Paul: “John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on Him Who should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ.” When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. And all the men were about twelve. And he went into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.

And the deacon announceth:

Wisdom, stand aright! Let us listen to the Holy Gospel!

*Priest:* Peace be unto all.

*People:* And to thy spirit.

*Priest:* A reading from the Holy Gospel according to Mark \[§1\]

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. As it is written in the prophets: “Behold, I send My messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. The voice of one crying in the wilderness: ‘Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight.’” John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And John was clothed with camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; and preached, saying: “There cometh One mightier than I after me, the latchet of Whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose. I indeed have baptized you with water; but He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

Then, the following—

Blessed is the Lord God, blessed is the Lord day by day; the God of our salvation shall prosper us along the way. Our God is the God of salvation.

Trisagion through Our Father…, and the kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!

Lord, have mercy! *Forty times*

O Christ God, Thou Long-suffering, greatly Merciful and exceedingly Compassionate One, Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped and glorified; Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on the sinful; Who callest all to salvation in the promise of good things to come: do Thou Thyself, O Lord, accept also our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies; set our minds aright; and cleanse our thoughts. And deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. Protect us by Thy holy angels, that, preserved and guided by their array, we may attain unto the unity of the Faith and to the understanding of Thine unapproachable glory: for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…

We magnify thee, the Theotokos, who art more honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the seraphim, and without corruption gavest birth to God the Word.

In the name of the Lord, father, bless!

*Priest:* Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy upon us.

Then, the reader readeth this prayer—

O Master, God Almighty, O Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son, and Thou O Holy Spirit—one Godhead, one Power: have mercy on me a sinner, and by judgments which Thou knowest save me, Thine unworthy servant, for Thou art blessed unto the ages of ages. Amen.

The Sixth Hour

*Reader:* O come, let us worship… *Thrice*

Psalm 73

O God, why hast Thou cast us off unto the end? Why hath Thine anger raged against the sheep of Thy pasture? Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast purchased from the beginning. Thou hast redeemed the rod of Thine inheritance, this Mount Sion wherein Thou hast dwelt. Lift up Thy hands against their pride at the end, against the things which the enemy hath wickedly done in Thy holy place. And those who hate Thee have boasted in the midst of Thy feast. They set up their ensigns, yea, signs \(though they knew it not\) as it were for the departing on high. As in a forest of trees, with axes they cut down the doors thereof together, with two-edged axe and mason’s hammer have they broken it down. With fire have they burned down Thy sanctuary, they have profaned even unto the ground the habitation of Thy name. They said in their heart, even the whole kindred of them together: Come let us abolish all the feasts of God from the earth. Our signs have we not seen; there is no more any prophet, and he will know us no more. How long, O God, shall the enemy utter reproaches? Shall the adversary provoke Thy name to the end? Wherefore turnest away Thy hand, and Thy right hand out of the midst of Thy bosom for ever? But God is our king before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. Thou didst establish the sea by Thy might, Thou didst break the heads of the dragons in the water. Thou didst crush the head of the dragon, Thou gavest him as food to the Ethiopian peoples. Thou hast cloven fountains and torrents, Thou hast dried up the rivers of Etham. Thine is the day and Thine is the night; Thou hast perfected the light and the sun. Thou hast made all the borders of the earth; summer and spring hast Thou fashioned. Be mindful of this Thy creation. The enemy hath reproached the Lord, and a mindless people hath provoked Thy name. O deliver not unto beasts the soul which doth confess Thee; of the souls of Thy paupers be not forgetful unto the end. Look Thou upon Thy covenant, for the dark places of the earth are filled with the houses of iniquity. Let not the humbled and shamed man be turned away; the beggar and the poor man shall praise Thy name. Arise, O God, judge Thine own cause; remember the reproach made against Thee by the mindless man all the day long. Forget not the voice of Thy suppliants; the pride of those who hate Thee ascendeth continually.

Psalm 76

With my voice unto the Lord have I cried, with my voice unto God, and He was attentive unto me. In the day of mine affliction I sought out God, with my hands upraised by night before Him, and I was not deceived. My soul refused to be comforted; I remembered God and I was gladdened; I spake in idleness and my spirit became faint-hearted. Mine eyes were wakeful before the watches; I was troubled and spake not. I thought upon the days of old, and the years of ages past I called to mind, and I meditated. By night I pondered in my heart, and my spirit searched diligently. Will the Lord then cast me off unto the ages, and will He be favorable no more? Or will He cut off His mercy unto the end? Hath He brought to an end His word from generation to generation? Or will the Lord forget to be merciful? Or in His wrath will He shut up His compassions for ever? And I said: Now have I made a beginning; this change hath been wrought by the right hand of the Most High. I remembered the works of the Lord; for I will remember Thy wonders from the beginning. And I will meditate on all Thy works, and I shall ponder upon Thy ways. O God, in the sanctuary is Thy way. What God is as great as our God? Thou art God Who worketh wonders. Thou hast made Thy power known among the peoples; with Thine arm hast Thou redeemed Thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid; the abysses were troubled. Great was the resounding sound of the waters, the clouds gave forth a voice. Yea, for Thine arrows passed abroad; the voice of Thy thunder is in their rolling. And Thy lightnings have lightened the world; the earth was shaken and it trembled. In the sea are Thy byways, and Thy paths in many waters; and Thy footsteps shall not be known. Thou leddest Thy people as sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Psalm 90

He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of the God of heaven. He shall say unto the Lord: Thou art my helper and my refuge. He is my God, and I will hope in Him. For He shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunters and from every troubling word. With His shoulders will He overshadow thee, and under His wings shalt thou have hope. With a shield will His truth encompass thee; thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day, Nor for the thing that walketh in darkness, nor for the mishap and demon of noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but unto thee shall it not come nigh. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and thou shalt see the reward of sinners. For Thou, O Lord, art my hope. Thou madest the Most High thy refuge; No evils shall come nigh thee, and no scourge shall draw nigh unto thy dwelling. For He shall give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. On their hands shall they bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Upon the asp and basilisk shalt thou tread, and thou shalt trample upon the lion and dragon. For he hath set his hope on Me, and I will deliver him; I will shelter him because he hath known My name. He shall cry unto Me, and I will hearken unto him. I am with him in affliction, and I will rescue him and glorify him. With length of days will I satisfy him, and I will show him My salvation.

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…: Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

Once, the River Jordan was turned back by the mantle of Elisha when Elijah was borne aloft, and the waters were parted on either side, and the path which before was wet became dry for him, as a true image of baptism, whereby we pass through the flow of life. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As we have no boldness because of the multitude of our sins, O Virgin Theotokos, entreat Him Who was born of thee; for thy maternal supplication of the kindheartedness of the Master can accomplish much. Disdain not the entreaties of sinners, O most pure one, for He Who was well-pleased to suffer for us is merciful and able to save.

Then, these stichera—

*In Tone VIII:* Thus did the Lord say unto John: “Come and baptize Me Who have created thee, Who enlighten thee with grace and purify all! Touch thou My divine head, and be not hesitant. Let it be so now, for I have come to fulfill all righteousness. Do thou in no wise be reluctant, for I hasten to destroy the prince of darkness, the adversary who hideth in the waters, that I may now deliver the world from his snares, granting everlasting life, in that I love mankind.” *Twice*

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

*In Tone VI:* Today the prophecy of the Psalmist hasteneth to its fulfillment; for he said: The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back before the face of the Lord, before the face of the God of Jacob, Who came to receive baptism from His servant, that we also, having been washed clean of the impurity of idolatry, may be enlightened in soul for His sake.

*Stichos:* The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

The foregoing is repeated.

Glory…, in Tone V—

Why dost thou turn thy waters back, O Jordan? Wherefore dost thou withdraw thy streams? Why dost thou not rush forward in accordance with thy nature? “I am unable to bear the Fire which consumeth me!” it said; “I marvel and am astonished by His extreme condescension; for I am not ­accustomed to washing One Who is clean, neither am I used to cleansing One Who is sinless; but rather it is my wont to purify defiled vessels. Christ Who is baptized in me teacheth me to burn up the thorns of offenses! John, the voice of the Word, beareth witness to me, crying: ‘Behold, the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world!’” O ye faithful, to Him let us cry out: O God Who hast revealed Thyself for our salvation, glory be to Thee!

Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the sea are Thy byways, and Thy paths in many waters.

*Stichos:* The voice of Thy thunder is in their rolling.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: Draw ye water with joy out of the wells of salvation. And in that day thou shalt say: Sing to the Lord, call aloud upon His name, proclaim His glorious deeds among the nations; make mention that His name is exalted. Sing praise to the name of the Lord; for He hath done great things: declare this in all the earth. Exult and rejoice, O ye who dwell in Sion: for the Holy One of Israel is exalted in the midst thereof.

A Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the Romans \[§91\]

Brethren: As many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death. Therefore, we are buried with Him by baptism unto death, that as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection; knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with Him, knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over Him. For in that He died, He died unto sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. Likewise, reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.

*Deacon:* Wisdom, stand aright! Let us listen to the Holy Gospel.

*Priest:* Peace be unto all.

*People:* And to thy spirit.

*Priest:* A reading from the Holy Gospel according to Mark \[§2\]

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

At that time, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan. And straightway coming up out of the water, He saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon Him: and there came a voice from heaven, saying: “Thou art My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased.” And immediately the Spirit drove Him into the wilderness. And He was there in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto Him. Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying: “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the Gospel.”

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

Then, the following—

Let Thy compassions quickly go before us, O Lord, for we are become exceedingly poor. Help us, O God our Savior, for the sake of the glory of Thy name; O Lord, deliver us and be gracious unto our sins for Thy name’s sake.

Then, Trisagion through Our Father… Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!

Lord, have mercy! *Forty times*

O Christ God, Thou Long-suffering, greatly Merciful and exceedingly Compassionate One, Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped and glorified; Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on the sinful; Who callest all to salvation in the promise of good things to come: do Thou Thyself, O Lord, accept also our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies; set our minds aright; and cleanse our thoughts. And deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. Protect us by Thy holy angels, that, preserved and guided by their array, we may attain unto the unity of the Faith and to the understanding of Thine unapproachable glory: for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…

We magnify thee, the Theotokos, who art more honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the seraphim, and without corruption gavest birth to God the Word.

In the name of the Lord, father, bless!

*Priest:* Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy upon us.

Then, the reader readeth this prayer of Saint Basil the Great—

O God and Lord of hosts, Author of all creation, Who in the loving-kindness of Thine incomparable mercy didst send Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race, and by His precious Cross didst rend asunder the record of our sins, and hast thereby vanquished the princes and powers of darkness: do Thou Thyself, O Master Who lovest mankind, accept also these prayers of thanksgiving and supplication from us sinners, and deliver us from every pernicious and dark transgression, and from all enemies, visible and invisible, who seek to do us harm. Nail Thou our flesh to the fear of Thee, and incline not our hearts unto words or thoughts of evil, but wound our souls by Thy love, that, ever looking to Thee and guided by the light which doth emanate from Thee, the unapproachable and everlasting Light, we may send up unceasing confession and thanksgiving unto Thee: the unoriginate Father and Thine only-begotten Son, and Thy most holy, good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.

The Ninth Hour

*Reader:* O come, let us worship… *Thrice*

Psalm 92

The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. For He established the world which shall not be shaken. Thy throne is prepared of old; Thou art from everlasting. The rivers have lifted up, O Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices. The rivers will lift up their waves, at the voices of many waters. Wonderful are the surgings of the sea, wonderful on high is the Lord. Thy testimonies are made very sure. Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.

Psalm 113

When Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among a barbarous people, Judæa became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back. The mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs of flocks. What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou didst turn back? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye hills like lambs of flocks? At the presence of the Lord the earth was shaken, at the presence of the God of Jacob, Who turneth the rock into pools of waters, and the precipice into fountains of waters. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name give glory, for Thy mercy and Thy truth, Lest haply the heathen say: Where is their God? But our God is in heaven and on earth; all things soever He hath willed, He hath done. The idols of the nations are of silver and gold, the works of the hands of men. They have a mouth, but shall not speak; eyes have they, and shall not see. Ears have they, and shall not hear; noses have they, and shall not smell. Hands they have, and shall not feel; feet have they, and shall not walk; they shall make no sound in their throat. Let those that make them become like unto them, and all that put their trust in them. The house of Israel hath hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. The house of Aaron hath hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. Those who fear the Lord have hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. The Lord being mindful of us, hath blessed us. He hath blessed the house of Israel, He hath blessed the house of Aaron. He hath blessed those who fear the Lord, the little with the great. The Lord grant you increase, to you and to your children. Ye are blessed of the Lord, Who made heaven and the earth. The heaven of heaven belongeth to the Lord, but the earth He gave unto the sons of men. Not the dead shall praise Thee, O Lord, nor any that go down to hades. But we the living will bless the Lord from henceforth and for evermore.

Psalm 85

Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto me, for poor and needy am I. Preserve my soul, for I am holy; save Thy servant, O my God, that hopeth in Thee. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for unto Thee will I cry all the day long; make glad the soul of Thy servant, for unto Thee have I lifted up my soul. For Thou, O Lord, art good and gentle, and plenteous in mercy unto all those who call upon Thee. Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer, and attend unto the voice of my supplication. In the day of mine affliction have I cried unto Thee, for Thou hast heard me. There is none like unto Thee among the gods, O Lord, nor are there any works like unto Thy works. All the nations whom Thou hast made shall come and shall worship before Thee, O Lord, and shall glorify Thy name. For Thou art great and workest wonders; Thou alone art God. Guide me, O Lord, in Thy way, and I will walk in Thy truth; let my heart rejoice that I may fear Thy name. I will confess Thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify Thy name forever. For great is Thy mercy upon me, and Thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost hades. O God, transgressors have risen up against me, and the assembly of the mighty hath sought after my soul, and they have not set Thee before them. But Thou, O Lord my God, art compassionate and merciful, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy, and true. Look upon me and have mercy upon me; give Thy strength unto Thy servant, and save the son of Thy handmaiden. Work in me a sign unto good, and let those who hate me behold and be put to shame; for Thou, O Lord, hast holpen me and comforted me.

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…: troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

Once, the River Jordan was turned back by the mantle of Elisha when Elijah was borne aloft, and the waters were parted on either side, and the path which before was wet became dry for him, as a true image of baptism, whereby we pass through the flow of life. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and endured crucifixion, Who hast overthrown death by death and revealed resurrection: in that Thou art God, disdain not those whom Thou didst fashion with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One. Accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth, and who prayeth for us. And save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

Then these stichera—

*In Tone VII:* An awesome thing was it to behold the Creator of heaven and earth naked in the river, receiving from His servant baptism as a servant for our salvation. The angelic choirs marvelled in fear and joy; and with them we worship Thee. Save us, O Lord! *Twice*

*Stichos:* Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem.

*In Tone II:* When the Forerunner beheld the Lord of glory coming to him, he cried: “The Deliverer of the world hath arrived! He delivereth us from corruption and tribulation! He granteth remission of offenses, in that He is God on earth! In His mercy He hath come forth from the pure Virgin. He maketh children of God out of slaves, and instead of darkness bringeth illumination to mankind through the water of His divine baptism! Wherefore, come ye, that together we may glorify Him with the Father and the Holy Spirit!”

*Stichos:* The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid.

The foregoing is repeated.

Then the canonarch, standing in the middle of the temple, chanteth aloud the whole of the following sticheron, in Tone V—

When thy hand touched the all-pure head of the Master, with it and thy finger thou didst point Him out to us. Therewith do thou also point us out to Him, O Baptist, for thou hast great boldness and, in that thou art greater than all the prophets, thou art borne witness to by Him. Lift up to Him thine eyes, which beheld the most Holy Spirit descending in the form of a dove, O Baptist, and render Him merciful unto us; and come, stand with us, sealing our hymnody and helping us to celebrate His forefeast.

And we make three full prostrations.

Then the deacon intoneth the following, also aloud—

To the Orthodox episcopate of the Church of Russia; our Most Reverend Metropolitan N., First Hierarch of the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad; and our Right Reverend Archbishop \[or Bishop\] N.: Many years!

To this and subsequent petitions, both choirs respond in unison:

God grant them many years! Thrice

To the suffering Russian nation and its Orthodox people, both in the homeland and in the diaspora, in grievous circumstances: Many years!

To the civil authorities, and to all Orthodox Christians, grant, O Lord, peace and prosperity, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and many years!

And where this service is celebrated in a monastery—

Save, O Christ God, our venerable father abbot \[or archimandrite\] N. and his brethren in Christ. Preserve this holy community in peace, and establish this holy temple unto the ages of ages. Amen.

And both choirs together chant:

Save them, O Christ God! *Thrice*

Be it known that this chanting of Many Years is performed in cathedrals, in the presence of bishops. In other places, where convenient, it is performed at Compline, after the dismissal of the holy Liturgy, or after Vespers, when Compline on the Eve of Theophany falleth on a Saturday or a Sunday. But for monastic communities all typicons prescribe that this rite be inserted at this point during the Royal Hours.

Then both choirs together chant again the sticheron: Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone V—

When thy hand touched the all-pure head of the Master, with it and thy finger thou didst point Him out to us. Therewith do thou also point us out to Him, O Baptist, for thou hast great boldness and, in that thou art greater than all the prophets, thou art borne witness to by Him. Lift up to Him thine eyes, which beheld the most Holy Spirit descending in the form of a dove, O baptist, and render Him merciful unto us; and come, stand with us, sealing our hymnody and helping us to celebrate His forefeast.

During the Ninth Hour, the deacon censeth the entire church.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The Lord is my light and my Savior; whom then shall I fear?

*Stichos:* The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid?

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: “In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I succored thee: and I have formed thee, and given thee for a covenant of the nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desert heritages; saying to those who are in bonds: ‘Go forth!’, and bidding those who are in darkness to show themselves.” They shall be fed in all the ways, and in all the paths shall be their pasture. They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; but He Who hath mercy on them shall comfort them, and by fountains of waters shall He lead them. “And I will make every mountain a way, and every path a pasture to them.” Behold, these shall come from afar: and these from the north and the west, and others from the land of the Persians. Rejoice, ye heavens; and let the earth be glad: let the mountains break forth with joy; for the Lord hath had mercy on His people, and hath comforted the lowly ones of His people. But Sion said: “The Lord hath forsaken me, and, The Lord hath forgotten me.” Will a woman forget her child, so as not to have compassion upon the offspring of her womb? “But if a woman should even forget these, yet I will not forget thee,” saith the Lord.

Reading from the Epistle to Titus \[§302\]

Titus my child: The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present age, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus Christ, Who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a people of His own, zealous of good works. But after the kindness and love of God, our Savior, toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior, that, being justified by His grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

*Deacon:* Wisdom, stand aright! Let us listen to the Holy Gospel.

*Priest:* Peace be unto all.

*People:* And to thy spirit.

*Priest:* A reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew \[§6\]

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

At that time, Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. But John forbade Him, saying: “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?” And Jesus, answering, said unto him: “Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he suffered Him. And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo! the heavens were opened unto Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him: and, lo! a voice from heaven, saying: “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased!”

*People:* Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee!

Then, the following—

Deliver us not up utterly, for Thy holy name’s sake, neither disannul Thou Thy covenant, and cause not Thy mercy to depart from us, for Abraham’s sake, Thy beloved, and for Isaac’s sake, Thy servant, and for Israel’s, Thy holy one.

Then, Trisagion through Our Father…Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!

Lord, have mercy! *Forty times*

O Christ God, Thou Long-suffering, greatly Merciful and exceedingly Compassionate One, Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped and glorified; Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on the sinful; Who callest all to salvation in the promise of good things to come: do Thou Thyself, O Lord, accept also our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies; set our minds aright; and cleanse our thoughts. And deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. Protect us by Thy holy angels, that, preserved and guided by their array, we may attain unto the unity of the Faith and to the understanding of Thine unapproachable glory: for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…

We magnify thee, the Theotokos, who art more honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the seraphim, and without corruption gavest birth to God the Word.

In the name of the Lord, father, bless!

*Priest:* O God, have pity on us and bless us; cause Thy face to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.

Then, the reader readeth this prayer—

O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who art long-suffering over our offenses and hast brought us even unto this present hour, whereon Thou didst hang upon the life-creating Tree, didst make a path of entry for the noble thief, and didst destroy death by death: Cleanse us sinners, Thine unworthy servants, for we have sinned and committed iniquities, and we are not worthy to lift up our eyes and gaze upon the heights of heaven, for we have forsaken the path of Thy righteousness and have walked after the desires of our own hearts. Yet we entreat Thy boundless goodness: Have pity on us, O Lord, according to the multitude of Thy mercy, and save us for Thy holy name’s sake, for our days have vanished in vanity. Wrest us from the hands of the adversary, grant us remission of our sins, and mortify our carnal-mindedness, that, putting off the old man, we may clothe ourselves in the new man, and may live for Thee, our Master and Benefactor, and thus following Thy precepts, we may attain unto everlasting rest, where is the habitation of all who rejoice. For Thou art truly the true gladness and joy of those who love Thee, O Christ our God, and to Thee do we send up glory, with Thine unoriginate Father, and Thine all-holy, good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.

The Typica

Psalm 102

Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all that He hath done for thee, Who is gracious unto all thine iniquities, Who healeth all thine infirmities, Who redeemeth thy life from corruption, Who crowneth thee with mercy and compassion, Who fulfilleth thy desire with good things; thy youth shall be renewed as the eagle’s. The Lord performeth deeds of mercy, and executeth judgment for all those who are wronged. He hath made His ways known unto Moses, unto the sons of Israel the things that He hath willed. Compassionate and merciful is the Lord, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy; not unto the end will He be angered, neither unto eternity will He be wroth. Not according to our iniquities hath He dealt with us, neither according to our sins hath He rewarded us. For according to the height of heaven from the earth, the Lord hath made His mercy to prevail over those who fear Him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath He removed our iniquities from us. Like as a father hath compassion upon his sons, so hath the Lord had compassion on those who fear Him; for He knoweth whereof we are made, He hath remembered that we are dust. As for man, his days are as the grass; as a flower of the field, so shall he blossom forth. For when the wind is passed over it, then it shall be gone, and no longer will it know the place thereof. But the mercy of the Lord is from eternity, even unto eternity, upon those who fear Him. And His righteousness is upon sons of sons, upon those who keep His testament and remember His commandments to do them. The Lord in heaven hath prepared His throne, and His kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the Lord, all ye His angels, mighty in strength, that perform His word, to hear the voice of His words. Bless the Lord, all ye His hosts, His ministers that do His will. Bless the Lord, all ye His works, in every place of His dominion. Bless the Lord, O my soul.

Glory…: Psalm 145

Praise the Lord, O my soul. I will praise the Lord in my life, I will chant unto my God for as long as I have my being. Trust ye not in princes, in the sons of men, in whom there is no salvation. His spirit shall go forth, and he shall return unto his earth. In that day all his thoughts shall perish. Blessed is he of whom the God of Jacob is his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, Who hath made heaven and the earth, the sea and all that is therein, Who keepeth truth unto eternity, Who executeth judgment for the wronged, Who giveth food unto the hungry. The Lord looseth the fettered; the Lord maketh wise the blind; the Lord setteth aright the fallen; the Lord loveth the righteous; the Lord preserveth the proselytes. He shall adopt for His own the orphan and widow, and the way of sinners shall He destroy. The Lord shall be king unto eternity; thy God, O Sion, unto generation and generation.

Now & ever…—

O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who art immortal, and didst deign for the sake of our salvation to become incarnate of the holy Theotokos and Ever-virgin Mary, Who without change becamest man, and wast crucified and trampled down death by death, O Christ God, Who art One of the Holy Trinity, worshipped with the Father and the Holy Spirit: Save us!

Then:

In Thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are those who weep, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God.

Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for My sake.

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in the heavens.

We do not interpolate odes from the Menaion between the verses of the Beatitudes, neither do we read any Epistle or Gospel.

Glory…, Now & ever…:

Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!

Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!

Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!

The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory!

Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed.

The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory!

Glory…:

The choir of the holy angels and archangels, with all the heavenly hosts, doth hymn Thee and say: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory!

Now & ever…: And we recite the Symbol of Faith if Liturgy is not to be celebrated. But if Liturgy is to be celebrated, we proceed instead immediately to the prayer: Absolve, remit and pardon…

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages: Light of Light, true God of true God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father; by Whom all things were made; Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; and was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and suffered, and was buried; and arose again on the third day according to the Scriptures; and ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; and shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the dead; Whose kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord and Giver of life, Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to come. Amen.

Then, the prayer:

Absolve, remit and pardon our transgressions, O God, voluntary and involuntary, in word and in deed, whether committed knowingly or unknowingly, day and night, in mind and intention: forgive them all for us, in that Thou art good and lovest mankind.

Then, Our Father…, after which we chant the kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV—

In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: Fear not to baptize Me, for I have come to save Adam the first-created!

Lord, have mercy! *Forty times*

And this prayer—

O most Holy Trinity, One mighty in essence, indivisible Monarchy, Cause of all good things: Be thou well disposed toward me, a sinner. Make steadfast and wise my heart, and do away with all my defilement. Illumine my mind, that I may continually glorify, hymn, and worship Thee, saying: One is holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.

Then, It is truly meet…, and the dismissal of the day, after which all disperse until the hour of Vespers, which is celebrated together with the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great at the appointed time. Psalm 33: I will bless the Lord at all times…, is chanted after the Prayer beyond the Ambo at the end of the Liturgy. But if Liturgy is not to be celebrated, we chant that Psalm here, in the following manner—

Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and for evermore. *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…

I will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall continually be in my mouth.

In the Lord shall my soul be praised; let the meek hear and be glad.

O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together.

I sought the Lord, and He heard me, and delivered me from all my tribulations.

Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed.

This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his tribulations.

The angel of the Lord will encamp round about those who fear Him, and will deliver them.

O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that hopeth in Him.

O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; for there is no want to those who fear Him.

Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; but those who seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.

Come ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

What man is there that desireth life, who loveth to see good days?

Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

Turn away from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears are opened unto their supplication.

The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, utterly to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.

The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

The Lord is nigh unto those who are of a contrite heart, and He will save the humble of spirit.

Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

The Lord keepeth all their bones, not one of them shall be broken.

The death of sinners is evil, and those who hate the righteous shall do wrong.

The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, and none of them will do wrong that hope in Him.

*It is truly meet…, and the dismissal.*

Be it known that if the eve of Theophany fall on Saturday or Sunday, the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom is celebrated, while on the feast itself we celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great. If the eve fall on any other day besides Saturday or Sunday, we celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Basil on the eve, and that of Saint John Chrysostom on the feast itself.

Be it likewise known that when the feast of the Holy Theophany falleth on Sunday, the hymns of the feast completely supplant those of the Resurrection from the Octoechos.

