The 8th Day Of The Month Of January

Afterfeast Of The Holy Theophany

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father George The Khozebite & Of Our Venerable Mother Domnica

For This Day We Provide Also The Service For The Holy Hieromartyr Isidore Of Estonia

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable George, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

The assaults of evil thoughts, O blessed one, did not shake the battlements of thy soul; for, setting forth thy steadfast asceticism like a rampart, thou didst keep thyself unwounded and utterly unharmed by the cruel adversary, and, crowned as a victor, thou didst stand before the Master of all.

Exhausted by lying long in one place, afflicted with tears, and worn out by standing in night-long vigils of prayer, thou becamest a most magnificent example for monks, a model for all and a crown of praise. For thou didst master every form of the virtues and wast shown to be an heir to the kingdom on high through asceticism, O wise one.

Neither the length of the road, nor the harshness of thy surroundings, O venerable one, were able to weaken the fervor of thy journey toward God; and arriving and making thine abode in the places where the feet of our God once walked, thou didst not spare thyself in any way until thou didst reach the heavenly Sion through abstinence and pangs.

And 3 stichera of the venerable Domnica, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Showing the desire of thy heart, with compunction thou didst water the earth with tears, O glorious one, and didst wipe the footstool of Christ with thy hair; and, mindful of Him, and beholding Him as present, thou didst love Him and follow His footsteps in thought. And thou didst enlighten thy soul with most divine visions.

Thou didst shine forth from the western lands even unto the East, O most blessed one, as radiant as a most radiant star with the beams of thy virtuous works, O venerable one; and thou hast illumined the thoughts of the faithful with the splendor of thy miracles. Wherefore, we call thee blessed and honor thy memory, magnifying Christ Who hath glorified thee with honor.

Wounded with desire for the love of Christ, O most lauded Domnica, thou didst follow after Him, having spurned corruptible glory, the pleasures of the flesh and every other delight of life. Wherefore, Jesus, the Savior of our souls, Who loveth mankind, hath caused thee to dwell in a most splendid bridal-chamber.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone I—

He Who clotheth the sky with clouds is clothed today with the streams of the Jordan; He Who taketh away the sin of the world is cleansed with my cleansing. And He is borne witness to from on high by His kindred Spirit, as the only-begotten Son of the Father Most High. To Him let us cry aloud: O Christ our God Who hast appeared and saved us, glory to Thee!

Aposticha stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Go ye before us, O angelic hosts…”—

O my Jesus, Who art the radiant and self-shining Light which illumineth men: baptized in the streams of the Jordan, Thou hast greatly illumined all. O Christ, Thou Light Who art consubstantial with Thy Father, all creation, illumined by Thee, crieth to Thee: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

Come ye, and let us noetically purify our senses, that we may partake to repletion of divine glory; and, beholding Christ baptized in the flesh and crushing the head of the deceiver, let us cry out to Him, chanting with joy: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

In Thy loving-kindness, O my Jesus Who lovest mankind, in the River Jordan Thou dost give living water as drink to us who are burning with thirst. And, drinking of Thee, the light-bearing Wellspring of immortality, we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone II—

Seeing Thee coming to him at the River Jordan, John said: “O Christ God, wherefore hast Thou come to Thy servant? O Lord, since Thou art free of defilement, in whose name shall I baptize Thee? The Father? But Thou bearest Him within Thee. The Son? But Thou Thyself art Him incarnate. The Holy Spirit? Thou knowest how to give Him to the mouths of the faithful. O God Who hast appeared, have mercy upon us!

Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph was amazed…”—

Joshua, son of Nun, bringing the people and the ark of the covenant through the River Jordan, was an image of the future benefaction of God; for by his mystical crossing he spiritually representeth both the image of our transformation and a true depiction of regeneration. Christ appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds‘ pipes…”—

Christ is baptized, enlightening the world, and from on high the Father beareth witness, saying: “This is My Son, in Whom I am well pleased. Heed ye Him! This is He Who illumineth the universe with His loving-kindness, Who is baptized and saveth the human race, in that He is God!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and canons for the saints, with 4 troparia each.

Ode I

Canon I of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of the Venerable George, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O George, entreat Jesus, the Origin of wisdom, that He grant me as grace the opening of my mouth, that, rejoicing, I may worthily hymn thy memory with divine songs, ignorant though I am.

Thou didst live on earth like an incorporeal being, O glorious one, and hence hast joined the incorporeal choirs, hymning the Incorporeal One with thrice-holy hymns and receiving His effulgence.

With thy thoughts which transcend the world thou didst spurn the world; and, having labored ascetically in the land where Christ was raised, thou didst depart to the incorruptible world, joining the choirs of the firstborn, O wise one.

*Theotokion:* Opening my mouth, O pure one, I propose to hymn thee who gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom; but as I am impure and am unable to sing of thee, the most pure one, as is fitting I ask thine aid.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica, the acrostic whereof is: “I now honor the goodly maiden Domnica”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Giving wings to thy soul with divine desire, O glorious one, thou didst soar over the snares of the flesh. Wherefore, I beseech thee: By thy supplications, O most wise Domnica, deliver me who am caught in the snares of the serpent.

Rejoicing, thou didst follow after Christ, walking according to His sacred precepts, O most honored one; and, as an undefiled virgin, thou hast joined the ranks of the virgins. Wherefore, assembling with faith, we honor thee, O right glorious one.

In no wise sleeping the sleep of evil, O glorious one, with splendid acts thou didst overcome it; and thou hast departed to the never-waning Light, clothed in the splendors thereof; and thou dost illumine those who hymn thee.

*Theotokion:* O pure Mother of God, thou didst supernaturally remain incorrupt after giving birth, as thou wast before childbirth. Wherefore, desiring thee with divine spirit, the incorrupt Domnica followed in thy train, to meet thy Son, the King of all, O pure one.

Ode III

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Bathing thyself with thy tears, thou didst cleanse thy flesh of the mire of the world, and thou didst drown the hordes of the demons with thine asceticism as with the river’s streams.

Thou didst pass through life venerably, blamelessly and righteously, O wise one; and through the pangs of asceticism thou didst inherit that life which is devoid of pain, O divinely blessed George.

Seized by divine desire, O most blessed one, thou didst depart to the places of Sion and there didst make thine abode, even unto thy death, laying waste to thy flesh through thy pangs, O most wise one.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden Bride of God, who gavest birth to the Word Who washeth away the sins of the world, to the paths of repentance guide the lost one who hymneth thee.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Thou didst rescue the sailors who were tempest-tossed at sea, pouring forth oil and thy blessing upon the waters and transforming the storm into calm.

With a divine gesture, the radiant angel announced thee, who shinest with beams of immaterial light, to the hierarch who had arrived in the Imperial City.

Propelled by the sail of asceticism, O glorious one, thou didst reach the havens of dispassion, and thou hast become a haven for those foundering in the depths of evil.

*Theotokion:* Strengthen thou my weakness, O Virgin who gavest birth to the Power of the Most High, Who bestoweth existence upon all things and hath magnified the memory of Domnica.

Kontakion of the venerable George, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Thou hast been shown to be an all-radiant beacon illumining with divine rays the faithful who cry out to thee: Pray for us to Christ the Master, Who appeared in the streams of the Jordan and hath enlightened mortals.

Sessional hymn of the venerable George, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

Let us now hymn and magnify the glorious citizen of heaven, the intercessor for the faithful who is great in asceticism; for with pure pangs and his glorious manner of life he truly strove to please Him Whose good pleasure it was to ascend the Cross.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable Domnica, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Thou didst crucify the flesh with its passions and didst give all thy love to Christ, thine incorrupt Bridegroom, O Domnica. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown and hast joined the angelic choirs, O venerable one, earnestly entreating Him in behalf of those who honor thee.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone—

Thou didst sanctify the streams of the Jordan and didst crush the might of sin, O Christ our God; Thou didst bow Thy head beneath the hand of the forerunner and hast saved the human race from deception. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: Save Thou our souls!

Ode IV

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Lovingly nurturing thyself with fasting as with food, O blessed one, thou didst set thy soul, which now rejoiceth, before the Creator of all Who hath called thee, who rejoiceth in the divine glory on high.

Thou didst show thyself to be a model of heaven, adorned with stars, bearing the Lord as thy sun, Who illumineth thy soul as it were the moon and showeth it to partake of His glory.

Descending from heaven for our sake, the Master found Sion to be a truly divine habitation, where thou, making thine abode, hast by thy desire ascended to the Sion on high as by a ladder, having dwelt in the one here below.

*Theotokion:* He Who sitteth eternally in the bosom of the Father without being circumscribed hath now appeared, seated in thine arms, circumscribed; and He hath shown thee, who gavest birth to Him, to be ever-virgin after birthgiving, and truly incorrupt.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst emit the effulgence of healings, dispelling the gloom of the passions and the hordes of the demons; and thou hast illumined those who piously have recourse to thee, O Domnica.

Thy Bridegroom, the King of heaven, O glorious one, doth glorify thee before those who reign on earth, who marvel at thine incorrupt life and miracles.

As One Who hearkeneth to thy supplications, the Lord manifestly indicated the place wherein thou wast to erect a school, O Domnica, dispelling the evil spirits.

*Theotokion:* By thy divine birthgiving Adam was able to shed to garments of mortality; and the only incarnate Word clad himself in the robe which thou didst weave in thy womb.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The angels and all the company of the venerable were amazed, beholding thy truly unceasing pangs and thy strict manner of life; for, bearing pain as though thou wast an inanimate stone, thou didst accomplish the correction of the virtues.

The Great One Who filleth all things with radiance and freeth all from the darkness of the passions, illumined thy whole soul, like the most pure sun, accomplishing thy salvation.

Thou didst leave thy homeland, O wise George, loving more than the things of this life Christ, Who made Himself a stranger among men. Wherefore, vouchsafed heavenly grace thou wast worthy of Him.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast adorned the fullness of mankind, O pure one; for thou wast shown to be more spacious than the wide heavens, O Maiden who gavest birth to God the Word Who stretched out the heavens as they were a curtain and hath restored men.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Having cultivated the ground, cutting the fertile furrow of thy soul with the plough of prayer, thou didst reap thy fruit, storing it in the granaries of God, O pure one.

Illumining thy pure thought, the effulgence of the all-accomplishing Spirit showeth things afar off as though they were nigh, and foretelleth the fulfillment of things to come.

The power of the Spirit maketh thee a doer of sacred acts, anointed with the deifying oil of ministry, commanding thee to shepherd sacred souls, O divinely wise Domnica.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth unto the holy Lord of all, Whom Domnica desired with all her soul, mastering the corrupting passions; and she hymneth thee, O Virgin Who didst bear the Lord.

Ode VI

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

With never-ending tears thou didst cry out to God, and He saved thy life, as from a cruel sea monster, bringing thee to the tranquil and ever-flowing springs of deification.

The choir of the virtues set thee up as a four-walled rampart, O blessed one, impervious to the bow-shots of the noetic foe; for, as one mighty, thou dost vanquish the tempter.

Like a pure lamb thou didst hasten to Khozeva, and, supporting thyself by thy deeds as with a staff, thou didst guide to Eden the Lord’s sheep, which He entrusted to thee.

*Theotokion:* The Lord made His abode in thy womb as a man, vouchsafing incorrupt habitations unto me, a man, and overlooking mine iniquitous deeds and transgressions, O pure one.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst raise up the sacred prophecy of the godly and divinely wise Prophet Zachariah, O divinely wise Domnica, and with him thou dost dance in the holy temple.

Thou wast shown to be an abundant stream of healings, washing away the flame of the passions and pouring forth the sanctity of salvation, O all-praised virgin, namesake of the Lord.

As one goodly, comely, honorable and shining with rays of virginity, O glorious one, the Lord thy Bridegroom taketh thee to Himself.

*Theotokion:* For thy sake, O most holy Bride of God, the most Perfect One became a babe in my form for my sake, restoring me who have grown old through the passions.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Today hast Thou appeared to the world, O Lord, and Thy light hath been signed upon us who chant to Thee with understanding: Thou hast come and hast revealed Thyself, O Light unapproachable!

*Ikos:* As the prophet said, Christ, the great Light, hath shone forth upon Galilee of the nations, the country of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali. The Lord hath manifested Himself as a radiant Beam, shining forth from Bethlehem, yet more from Mary, upon the benighted; and He, the Sun of righteousness, doth illumine the whole universe with His rays. Wherefore, come, all ye naked children of Adam, let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warm; for He covereth the naked and enlighteneth the darkened. Thou hast come, Thou hast revealed Thyself, O Light unapproachable!

Ode VII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Worn out by the pangs of asceticism, thou didst not give thyself over to the thoughts of Satan; for, having acquired a mind fixed unwaveringly upon the Lord Who is able to save, thou didst repel every assault.

By prostrations, vigils and fasting thou didst mortify all thy members on the earth; and now thou livest a life of incorruption, bereft of pain, O blessed one, praying for us who hymn thee with love.

O wise one, thou didst greatly desire to behold and worship at the tomb of the Eternal One; and while there thou didst in holy manner conceive the thought of dying, through abstinence, with Him Who in His loving-kindness allowed Himself to be slain, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* They who acknowledge thee to have given birth to the Creator have not worshipped a creation, O Maiden, but, acknowledging the Word, the true God Who shone forth from thee, they cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Ever deified by gazing toward God, thy mind became godly, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, thou didst avoid the comfort of the flesh, chanting: Blessed and all-glorious art Thou!

The transcendent God, Who resteth in thee, revealeth divine mysteries to thee; for thou didst behold a holy angel, who came and sanctified the nature of water by the Spirit, O honored one.

As a temple of the divine Spirit, in the holy temple thou didst hear a voice which taught thee divine mysteries and of the departure of the emperor from the body, O honored one.

*Theotokion:* The Lord is my strength, my song and my salvation, and He foreordained thee to be His most pure Mother and unwedded Bride. Him do thou ever beseech in behalf of thy servants, O pure one.

Ode VIII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyelids nor sleep to thine eyes, O father, until thou didst make thyself a pleasing habitation and dwelling-place for the Almighty. Him do all His works hymn and exalt supremely forever.

O blessed one, thou didst acquire as the reward of thy countless labors the paradise which the Lord hath prepared for those who desire Him with all their soul and cry out unceasingly: Hymn and exalt Him supremely forever!

The Monastery of Khozeva acquired as its rule and most excellent model thee who passed through every aspect of virtuous works, O wise George, thou boast of the venerable. Wherefore, having lived a godly life, they exult with thee for all ages.

*Theotokion:* In His ineffable mercy, He Who is simple in His divine essence manifested Himself through thee, O Theotokos, as truly complex, receiving flesh of thy blood. Wherefore, knowing thee to be the Theotokos, we chant hymns for all ages.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* God Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Adorned with the virtues and arrayed in the vesture of miracles, O Domnica, thou didst hasten to the beauteous bridal-chamber of Christ the King, hymning and exalt Him supremely forever.

Following Christ, as thy pure Shepherd, to the fold of heaven, O holy and venerable ewe-lamb, with joy thou madest thine abode where His elect sheep have their dwelling.

Learning of thy departure from thy body through the all-accomplishing action of God, with most pure soul thou didst offer joyous praise to the Cause of all, in Whose hands thou didst place thy spirit, O pure one.

*Theotokion:* The transcendent God, Who is supremely glorified for all ages, becometh matter through thy blood for our sake, desiring, in His mercy and loving-kindness, to restore our corrupted essence.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon of the Venerable George

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Every pleasure of life didst thou spurn for the sake of the sweetness of heaven; for thou didst love a harsh existence more than a comfortable life, and didst strive to extinguish the furnace of the passions with thy many tears, O George, precious adornment of monastics.

Truly, O most wise one, thou dost now stand before God, to Whom thou didst once strive to unite thyself through abstinence, and in Whose manifestations thou dost now manifestly delight. Wherefore, grant thou enlightenment and a share of things divine unto all who honor thee.

Delivered from the darkness of life, thou wast taken up to the never-waning Light, O glorious one, and thou standest with the heavenly ranks before the three-Sunned Light and delightest in the splendors which emanate therefrom. And thou dost illumine us who hymn thee, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to deify me wholly, God uniteth Himself wholly to thee and worketh a new miracle inconceivable to all: thou, an incorrupt Virgin, dost give birth, and God is seen in the flesh. Honoring Him, we now call thee blessed, O Mary, as thou thyself didst foretell.

Canon of the Venerable Domnica

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

The most sacred choirs appeared to those who watched, beginning at the honored repose of thy divine soul, chanting with sacred hymns and guiding thee to the place of wondrous habitation, where the voice of those who keep festival is heard, O glorious one.

Appearing like an upright shoot of a divine branch, thou didst grow for us the divine grapes of compunction, which exude the wine of healings, O Domnica, making glad the souls and hearts of those who honor thee with faith.

From the bodily passions, spiritual defilements and every assault of the enemy do thou, by thy supplications, deliver us who have recourse with love to thy protection, O Domnica, and celebrate thy divine and honored feast.

O Domnica, namesake of the Lord, we all praise thee as a ray of the Sun illumining the world, an all-comely bride of Christ, a precious turtle-dove, an olive-tree, a cedar, a chosen dove.

*Theotokion:* Have pity, have pity on me, O Lord, when Thou shalt come to sit in judgment, and condemn me not to the fire, neither with Thy wrath rebuke me; for the Virgin who gave birth to Thee entreateth Thee, O Christ, as do multitudes of angels and the ranks of the venerable.

Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

The Savior, Who is grace and truth, hath revealed Himself in the streams of the Jordan, and hath enlightened those who sleep in darkness and shadow; for He is come and hath appeared, the Light unapproachable.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

A great and awesome mystery is now accomplished: for the Master of all is baptized at the hand of His servant for the purification of all men.

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

From on high the Father cried aloud: “This is my beloved Son Who is now baptized in the flesh in the waters of the Jordan!”

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

The ranks of angels, beholding the Master, in the guise of a servant, baptized in the waters, were amazed and chanted.

Glory…, Now & ever…, idiomelon, in the same tone—

The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid; for the cherubim are unable to gaze upon Thy glory, and the seraphim cannot bear to look upon Thee; yet, standing before Thee in fear, the cherubim bear Thee up and the seraphim glorify Thy power. With them, O Compassionate One, we declare Thy praise, saying: O God Who hast appeared, have mercy upon us!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 6 troparia, from Ode I of both canons of the feast.

