Also On The 8th Day Of The Month Of January

Afterfeast Of The Holy Theophany

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Isidore & The 72 Martyred With Him For Orthodoxy, In Yuriev Of Estonia

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Go ye before us, O angelic hosts…”—

O my Jesus, Who art the radiant and self-shining Light which illumineth men: baptized in the streams of the Jordan, Thou hast greatly illumined all. O Christ, Thou Light Who art consubstantial with Thy Father, all creation, illumined by Thee, crieth to Thee: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

Come ye, and let us noetically purify our senses, that we may partake to repletion of divine glory; and, beholding Christ baptized in the flesh and crushing the head of the deceiver, let us cry out to Him, chanting with joy: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

In Thy loving-kindness, O my Jesus Who lovest mankind, in the River Jordan Thou dost give living water as drink to us who are burning with thirst. And, drinking of Thee, the light-bearing Wellspring of immortality, we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

And 5 stichera of the martyrs, idiomela, in Tone VIII—

What shall we call you, O holy ones, in that ye crushed the hordes of the demons and shattered their darts by your mighty suffering at the hands of tormentors? For ye stood fearlessly for the Orthodox Faith of Christ, for which ye bravely gave your bodies over to torture, O ye holy seventy-two martyrs, with Isidore your teacher; and by your suffering, O honored ones, ye have gladdened the Holy Church of Christ. Heal us who are sick with sin, O godly martyrs, in that ye have boldness before the Lord, Who hath received baptism from a servant. *Twice*

What shall we name thee, O valiant priest Isidore? For thou didst lead to Christ a regiment of martyrs, and with them hast glorified the Orthodox Faith of your fathers in the face of the vain-minded Latins, and didst cast down their strange doctrines and false persuasions by the power of Christ Who by His baptism hath crushed the heads of the serpents in the Jordan, that He might save us and wash away the multitude of our sins through the entreaties of His martyrs, in that He is compassionate and loveth mankind. *Twice*

What shall we call you, O holy and right victorious martyrs of Christ, with your sacred teacher Isidore? For, having preserved the law of the Lord inviolate, ye maintained the pious worship of Christians and put the prideful tyrants to shame through the power of Christ our Savior, Who hath been baptized in the Jordan. Him do ye beseech, O martyrs of the Lord, that we be delivered from the outer darkness and the fire of Gehenna, and that our souls may be saved.

Glory…, in Tone V—

Rejoice, O Isidore, thou priest of God, valiant minister of the mysteries of Christ, having with thee the equally zealous assembly of seventy-two martyrs, for like a star of surpassing radiance thou hast shone forth in the firmament of the Church, didst manifestly preach the consubstantial and indivisible Trinity—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit Who proceedeth from the Father—before the malicious Roman bishop and many people, denouncing the Latin faith. Wherefore, your holy bodies were committed to the river’s streams, O martyrs of Christ, yet were later cast up upon dry land by the providence of God; and Christ hath given rest to your spirits in the mansions of heaven. And now, O holy martyrs who died for the Orthodox Faith, entreat Christ God, that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone II—

Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may glorify Thee, O Savior, the Enlightener of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \[5:15-6:3\]

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgement for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

At Litia, the sticheron of the feast, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, idiomelon, in Tone IV—

He that doth clothe Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without shattering He fashioneth, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.

Of the martyrs, in Tone I—

Great is the wonder! On the holy feast, the enemies of the Trinity prevent the wondrous Isidore and his flock from sanctifying the waters; yet having steadfastly resisted the persuasion of the heretics, the holy martyrs are thrust down through the ice by the ungodly, thereby sanctifying the river by their martyric death. O ye who love the saints of the Church, rejoice and be glad, for the martyrs, having received their reward from Christ in the heavens, pray fervently in behalf of those who honor their ineffable sacrifice.

Glory…, of the martyrs, in Tone II—

Come, ye who love the martyrs, and let us noetically enjoy today the spiritual banquet which the seventy-three martyrs of the Lord have set before us. As ye dwell in spirit with the angels, O athletes of Christ, entreat ye Christ the Savior, that He grant remission of sins unto us who with faith celebrate your honored memory.

Now & ever…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth order prevail. Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth the sinless head which no man fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let us exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all men, illumining and granting mercy unto the faithful!

Aposticha stichera of the martyrs, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

The wrathful tyrant sought to cow you with multifarious threats that he would give your bodies over to grievous tortures, O godly minded martyrs; yet ye did not fall away from the Orthodox Faith of Christ, but endured suffering in prison, and received a bitter death in the expectation of future reward and immortal glory.

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

Let the wondrous, divine and all-wise passion-bearers be honored with sacred hymns, for, in preaching Orthodoxy before the enemy in sacred manner, they extinguished ungodly falsehood by their sufferings, and have received that glory which fadeth not away.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Ye put to shame the lawless tyrant who iniquitously commanded you to confess an erroneous faith, O blessed and wise martyrs of great renown; and, suffering patiently, ye wove wreaths of victory, praying for the world.

Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone IV—

Breathing forth insatiable love for Christ, ye refused to renounce Orthodoxy, O holy seventy-two martyrs with your teacher, the sacred Isidore, and ye endured divers insults and ill treatment; yet, strengthened by Christ, ye set at naught the audacity of the torturers, O holy ones, and, holding to the Faith of Christ without wavering, ye have been translated to the heavens, to the Creator of all, for Whom ye suffered. Wherefore, as ye have boldness before Him, ask ye that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI—

Beholding the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin asking for baptism in the Jordan, the radiant luminary who shone forth from the barren woman cried out to Him with fear and joy: “Do Thou sanctify me by Thy divine epiphany, O Master!”

Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone II—

O blessed passion-bearers of the Lord, ye preached the Orthodox Faith of Christ with boldness, and at the tribunal denounced the false doctrines of the enemy; wherefore, ye were cast into the depths of the river, O holy ones, yet your souls have made their abode in the mansions of heaven, where, standing with the saints before the throne of God, the King of all, ye pray to Him for all Orthodox people who hold your struggles in honor.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the martyrs; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Like great stars do ye ever illumine the honored firmament of the Church and shed light upon the faithful, O divine martyrs, ye warriors of Christ.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Joshua, son of Nun, bringing the people and the ark of the covenant through the River Jordan, was an image of the future benefaction of God; for by his mystical crossing he spiritually representeth both the image of our transformation and a true depiction of regeneration. Christ appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Having passed through torments with manly resolve, O wondrous passion-bearers, ye also passed through the depths of the river and attained unto the broad expanse of salvation, receiving the kingdom of heaven as your inheritance, wherein do ye make divine supplication for us, O right victorious martyrs

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ pipes…”—

Christ is baptized, enlightening the world, and from on high the Father beareth witness, saying: “This is My Son, in Whom I am well pleased. Heed ye Him! This is He Who illumineth the universe with His loving-kindness, Who is baptized and saveth the human race, in that He is God!”

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify you, O holy martyrs, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye endured for Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Our God is refuge and strength. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

B A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. \[Ps. 45: 2\]

A Therefore shall we not fear when the earth be shaken. \[Ps. 45: 3\]

B O God, who shall be likened unto Thee? Be Thou not silent, neither be still, O God. \[Ps. 82: 2\]

A For behold, Thine enemies have made a noise, and those who hate Thee have lifted up their heads. \[Ps. 82: 3\]

B Against Thy people have they taken wicked counsel, and have conspired against Thy saints. \[Ps. 82: 4\]

A They have made the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

B The flesh of Thy saints for the beasts of the earth. \[Ps. 78: 2\]

A They have poured out their blood like water. \[Ps. 78: 3\]

B For Thy sake we are slain all the day long. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

A We are counted as sheep for the slaughter. \[Ps. 43: 23\]

B Thou hast made us a byword among the nations. \[Ps. 43: 15\]

A And I became a man scourged all the day long. \[Ps. 72: 14\]

B By fire hast Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire. \[Ps. 65: 11\]

A We went through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment. \[Ps. 65: 12\]

B Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous. \[Ps. 31: 11\]

A For the Lord is in the generation of the righteous. \[Ps. 13: 5\]

B And their inheritance shall be for ever. \[Ps. 36: 18\]

A The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. \[Ps. 33: 18\]

B A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright of heart. \[Ps. 96: 11\]

A In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. \[Ps. 111: 6\]

B In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them. \[Ps. 15: 3\]

A Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

B The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. \[Ps. 91: 13\]

A The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, and shall hope in Him. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

B And all the upright in heart shall be praised. \[Ps. 63: 11\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone VIII—

Bound and imprisoned by the enemy, ye remained invincible, preserved by faith; and when ye were released from your bodies, O holy ones, ye were manifestly clothed in divine desire. Wherefore, ye have shone forth like beacons in the world, illumining the faithful with the grace of the Spirit. O passion-bearing martyrs, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto those who with love honor your holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Come, O ye faithful, let us behold where Christ was baptized, that we may follow Him to the River Jordan, to the voice of one crying in the wilderness, and there may see the Creator of Adam touched by the hand of His servant, in His ineffable loving-kindness; and may cry aloud to Him: Thou hast come and revealed Thyself, to sanctify the waters in the Jordan!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §36 \[10:16-22\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end shall be saved.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone II—

Come, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us rejoice in the Lord at the memorial of the passion-bearers! Come, let us manifestly chant, praising the athletes of Christ who rejected false reasonings and malicious falsehood and fearlessly professed the Orthodox Faith of Christ in the midst of the tribunal! Wherefore, O most blessed and long-suffering ones, pray ye unceasingly in behalf of our souls.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the martyrs, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of the Martyrs, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

Ye have inherited the life which is devoid of grief, O ye seventy-three holy martyrs. As ye are ever full of spiritual joy, drive all grief from my soul, I pray, that, rejoicing, I may glorify your sacred suffering.

Ye were newly revealed stars, O martyrs of Christ, led by the right glorious and sacred Isidore who was mighty in teaching and endurance; wherefore, we entreat you: Drive from our hearts the darkness of sin, O right victorious martyrs of Christ.

Set afire by the divine coals of the Holy Spirit, O holy athletes, with valiant suffering ye shone forth, and shattered all the arrows of the ancient serpent, the deceitful adversary.

*Triadicon:* O consubstantial Trinity—Father, Word and Holy Spirit—we glorify Thee with faith as the Creator of all, and piously cry out to Thee: O Holy Trinity our God, save us through the supplications of Thine athletes.

*Theotokion:* Thou art the portal of divine glory, O all-pure Lady. Open unto me the gates of repentance, O Mistress, and rescue my lowly soul from the gates of hades, I pray, that I may glorify thee, my fervent helper, as is meet.

Ode III

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

The lying enemy incited all manner of malice in his battle against the saints, yet was he vanquished by them, beholding them to be unconquered: for the power of God aided them. Wherefore, the divinely blessed ones have been shown to be receptacles of divine radiance.

The evil-minded Roman bishop desired that ye cast off the Orthodox Faith, O saints, and espouse his false ideas and unleavened liturgy; but as valiant warriors ye withstood him, O holy ones, and won victory over him by the power of Christ.

*Triadicon:* The Father is light; the Son is light; and the Holy Comforter is light: for the Trinity, shining forth as from a single Sun, doth divinely illumine and preserve our souls, through the entreaties of the holy martyrs.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin Mother who gavest flesh to God, accept thou the voices of those who ever cry unto thee, and deliver us from the divers temptations of the enemy.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone V—

Like the stars doth the memory shine forth today of Thy seventy-two passion-bearers, together with their priestly leader Isidore, who have shone forth and, with the help of God, have driven the gloom of error away from the faithful, in that they have boldness before the Lord, before Whom they stand, praying for all of us who with faith honor their precious sufferings.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou didst sanctify the streams of the Jordan and didst crush the might of sin, O Christ our God; Thou didst bow Thy head beneath the hand of the forerunner and hast saved the human race from deception. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: Save Thou our souls!

Ode IV

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

O ye seventy-two holy athletes, and thou, O Isidore, teacher of the true Faith of Christ, who art like a pure dove: the most wicked one was not able to move you from your godly stance, but rather the evil one himself did fall.

O glorious passion-bearers, and thou, O blessed and valiant athlete Isidore, who leddest a choir of martyrs to the Lord: ye considered all the beauties of the world but dung, that ye might acquire Christ our God, our true beauty, our riches which cannot be taken away.

*Triadicon:* O ye people, ever offering worship with faith, let us piously glorify the Trinity of Persons, the Unity in image, the true God, Whom the ranks of angels and archangels hymn as the Master of creation.

*Theotokion:* The Lord became incarnate of thy pure blood, granting repentance by thy goodly mediation to those who honor thee, O most hymned one, in that He is compassionate and alone loveth mankind.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

Cast into the water for the sake of Christ the King, the Life of all, the seventy-three saints were filled with spiritual waters, and at the behest of God their precious bodies were borne up upon dry land; and by the power of God they have dried up the turbulent torrents of deception, and have given drink to the hearts of the faithful.

Moved by great zeal, O divine martyrs, and strengthened by Christ, ye put the enemies of the Orthodox Faith to shame and trampled the false doctrines and laws of the Latins underfoot, O holy ones, regarding them as of no account. Through the entreaties of the martyrs, O Word of God, deliver from great tortures us who bless their holy torments with all our soul.

*Triadicon:* Glorifying the one all-unoriginate and everlasting Godhead, we worship God in three Persons, indivisible in essence and equal in glory, as the divine martyrs preached.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who art blessed among women, grant thy mercies to thy people, through the supplications of the passion-bearers of Christ, for thou hast been shown to be the Mother of the Merciful One.

Ode VI

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

“What to us are the many words thou utterest, O bishop and proponent of an erroneous faith? What to us are the promises thou makest?” the sacred Isidore and his companions said to the tyrant; “All these things are to us more bitter than gall! Yet do as thou desirest, O vain-minded one!”

The Holy Spirit strengthened you, O honorable passion-bearers of Christ, richly made His abode within you, and granted you endurance against the cruel-hearted enemies; and by His power ye endured many tortures and torments at the hands of those who were not Orthodox, O holy ones. Wherefore, ye have been crowned by the rich right hand of Christ, for Whom ye suffered.

*Triadicon:* O Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, Unity in three Hypostases and indivisible Trinity: have mercy upon those who worship Thy divine might.

*Theotokion:* The mouth of the orator cannot describe thy mystery, O Maiden; for thou gavest birth to the Ineffable One, and bearest on thine arm Him Who sustaineth all things.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

With hymns let us honor the choir of the martyrs of Christ who suffered mightily for the sake of the true Christian Faith and utterly cast down the pride of the enemy. For, illumined by the grace of the uncreated Trinity, O glorious ones who suffered with hieromartyr Isidore, ye shine forth like stars amid the universe. Pray ye now unceasingly to Christ, and defend us from invasion by enemy nations, O ye tireless advocates for our souls.

*Ikos:* The all-wise Creator, the Master and Lord of the noetic vineyard, as He saith with His all-holy mouth in the parable of the vineyard, giveth rich recompense to those who labor until the eleventh hour. And now, revealing that which was hidden in the parable, He hath shown forth hieromartyr Isidore and the company of seventy-two athletes with him, to be splendid martyrs and most excellent warriors. For, having trampled the traditions and laws of the Latins underfoot, O valiant ones, and by your mighty opposition and endurance having cast into confusion those who hate the Orthodox Faith, ye became like unto the ancient martyrs, O holy ones. Wherefore, Christ hath crowned thee with never-fading wreaths in the mansions of heaven, where the choirs of the martyrs rejoice. Defend us against the invasion of enemy nations, O ye tireless advocates for our souls.

Ode VII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

The true martyrs, the seventy-three athletes of Christ our true God, cried out to their tormentors: “For the Orthodox Faith of Christ we are ready to bear beatings, fire and any other tortures gladly!” And they joyously chanted: “If God is with us, no one can be against us! Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

The murderous people, gnashing their teeth and falling like wild beasts upon those celebrating Holy Theophany, threw them into prison and later cast them to the waters; but the martyrs chanted with joy: “Blessed is the God of our fathers!”

*Triadicon:* Let us glorify the indivisible Trinity, let us hymn the one Godhead—the Father, the Word and the most Holy Spirit!

*Theotokion:* Blessed art Thou, O God, Who madest Thine abode within the Virgin’s womb and hast saved man. All-hymned and supremely exalted art Thou forever!

Ode VIII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Boasting in the wounds of Christ, thou didst hasten to the everlasting mansions, O hieromartyr Isidore, together with the assembly of those martyred with thee; and, arrayed in whitened vesture, ye stand in splendor before the King of hosts, crying out with the martyrs: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

O ye seventy-three martyrs and athletes of Christ, with the help of God ye trampled the flame of the malice of the enemy underfoot, put the inhuman tyrants to shame, and, as ones invincible, have been crowned by Christ with unfading wreaths, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Like thirsty land, O blessed martyrs, did ye imbibe the teaching which flowed from the mellifluous tongue of the sacred Isidore, and ye stored it up in your souls as something of divine sweetness; and by him ye were offered to Christ, the Judge of the contest, as grain in measure a hundredfold, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Triadicon:* Let the Thrice-holy One be hymned: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Unity, the one Godhead Who holdeth all creation in His palm for all ages and regardeth with His rich mercy us who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* From thee, O most hymned Virgin, did God shine forth and illumine the benighted people with the knowledge of God; and from corruption unto the life of heaven hath He led us up, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Surrendering your bodies to wounding and bitter imprisonment for the sake of the Lord and King Most High, ye preserved your souls intact, O ye seventy-three blessed athletes of the Lord, and have been vouchsafed to receive a share of divine glory, O most honored martyrs.

With the all-radiant and sacred Isidore, O blessed ones, ye have been shown on earth to be stars of Christ, the never-waning Light; and ye illumine the souls of all those who call upon you with faith and honor your holy memory.

Cherishing your radiant and honored memory and rejoicing in spirit, we pray: O blessed Isidore, valiant teacher, and ye martyrs who suffered with him, ye invincible martyrs of Christ: preserve all Orthodox people unharmed.

*Triadicon:* Let us glorify the Essence in three Hypostases, the indivisible Glory Who is unceasingly hymned in heaven and on earth in one Godhead, the inseparable Trinity, piously worshipping the Father, the Son and the Spirit, that we may be delivered from fiery torment through the intercession of the passion-bearers who preached the Holy Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Come ye faithful, and with love let us all unceasingly praise the blessed Mary, the Lady Mother of God and Virgin, through whom we have found everlasting joy.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Having fallen asleep in the flesh…”—

Standing with the choirs of the martyrs before Christ, the never-waning Light, O ye seventy-three blessed and holy passion-bearers of the Lord, by your supplications save those who hymn you.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

The Savior, Who is grace and truth, hath revealed Himself in the streams of the Jordan, and hath enlightened those who sleep in darkness and shadow; for He is come and hath appeared, the Light unapproachable.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

A great and awesome mystery is now accomplished: for the Master of all is baptized at the hand of His servant for the purification of all men.

From on high the Father cried aloud: “This is my beloved Son Who is now baptized in the flesh in the waters of the Jordan!”

The ranks of angels, beholding the Master, in the guise of a servant, baptized in the waters, were amazed and chanted.

And 3 stichera of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…—

O all-praised martyrs of Christ, ye treated as of no account the raging of the persecutors and violent death, and, disposing yourselves right boldly, ye arrayed yourselves for battle with the glory of victory, and have been reckoned with all the righteous, with whom, ever offering praise, we call you blessed.

O all-blessed martyrs of Christ, ye gave yourselves over to drowning in the waters, have hallowed the earth with your bodies, and have illumined the air by your ascent to the heavens; and ye now dwell in the heavens, amid the never-waning light, ever praying for us, O ye who behold God.

O invincible martyrs of Christ, by the dew of divine grace ye passed unharmed through the torture of burning, and have been counted worthy to live beside still waters, receiving crowns of victory. Wherefore, rejoicing today, we celebrate your holy memory, glorifying Christ.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Having enlisted as soldiers of Christ, ye forsook all the beautiful things of the earth, and, taking the Cross upon your shoulders, ye followed after Him through all manner of torments, and would not deny Him before the tyrants. The angels have crowned your heads with wreaths of victory, O ye who were bold of soul, and ye have endured with splendor into the bridal-chamber of heaven. Wherefore, as ye have boldness before the Savior of all, pray ye for our souls.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone II—

The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid; for the cherubim are unable to gaze upon Thy glory, and the seraphim cannot bear to look upon Thee; yet, standing before Thee in fear, the cherubim bear Thee up and the seraphim glorify Thy power. With them, O Compassionate One, we declare Thy praise, saying: O God Who hast appeared, have mercy upon us!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode I of Canon I of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the martyrs.

Prokimenon of the feast, in Tone IV—

Blessed is He Who cometh in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord, and hath appeared unto us.

*Stichos:* O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endureth forever.

And the prokimenon of the martyrs, in the same tone—

The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \[6: 10-17\]

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Alleluia of the feast, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the sons of rams.

*Stichos:* The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of glory hath thundered, the Lord is upon the many waters.

And the Alleluia of the martyrs, in the same tone—

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Luke, §106 \[Lk. 21:12-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

Communion Verses—

The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

