The 9th Day of the Month of January

Afterfeast of the Holy Theophany of Our Lord

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Polyeuctus of Melitene in Armenia

For this Day We Provide also the Service for Our Holy Father Philip, Metropolitan of Moscow

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera: 3 of the afterfeast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal...”—

O Lord, even though thou didst stand before John as a man, in the Jordan, yet, seated with the Father, Thou didst not depart from Thy throne. And, baptized for our sake, Thou didst free the world from bondage to the alien one, in that Thou art compassionate and lovest mankind.

O Lord, even though Thou didst surround Thyself as a man with the Jordan’s waters, yet from on high wast Thou confirmed by the descent of the Spirit, and the voice of the Father bore witness to Thee as His Son. But do Thou appear and grant incorruption unto our souls.

O immutable Lord, Who before time began wast begotten of the Father, Thou didst come in the latter days and didst take the form of a servant, and as Creator didst renew Thine image; for, being baptized, Thou hast bestowed incorruption upon our souls.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

As Christ led David up out of the pit of the passions, so did He raise thee up, O martyr, from the miry clay of the delusion of idolatry; for He mystically set thy feet upon the rock of the knowledge of Him. Beseech Him, that we may be saved.

Neither the desire of thy spouse, nor the love of thy children, nor thy dignity, nor yet thy wealth in possessions and estates, caused the strength of thy soul to waver from the true faith in Christ, O most blessed Polyeuctus.

Even before the grace of thy suffering, O martyr, thou wast truly adorned with the works of righteousness. Wherefore, in accordance therewith, thou wast counted worthy to be a faithful witness of Christ, being piously baptized in thine own blood into His death.

Glory..., in Tone I, the composition of Byzantius—

The hosts of the angels today join chorus to commemorate the martyr Polyeuctus, and the race of man doth faithfully hold festival, and joyously crieth out: Rejoice, O most laudable one, who hast triumphed over the subtle snares of Belial, and hast been crowned by Christ with the wreath of victory! Rejoice, warrior of our great King and Savior, who destroyed the temples of the idols! Rejoice, adornment of martyrs! Pray thou that those who faithfully keep thine ever-honorable memory may be delivered from every threat.

Now and ever..., in Tone II—

Today the Creator of heaven and earth approacheth the Jordan in the flesh; the Sinless One asketh baptism, that He may cleanse the world of the falsehood of the enemy. And the Master of all is baptized by a servant, and through water granteth cleansing unto the human race. To Him let us cry out: O our God Who hast appeared, glory be to Thee!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

Before all Thou didst stand in the waters, O Unapproachable One, and Thou didst bow Thy head before the Baptist. And sanctifying the world, Thou didst deliver it from slavery by Thy baptism, O Sinless One.

*Stichos:* The sea saw that and fled, Jordan was driven back.

From on high, of old, the Father and the Spirit bore witness to the beloved Son, O Christ. Thus the mystery of the Trinity became known when Thou wast baptized in the Jordan.

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?

As God, O Savior, Thou didst sanctify all the waters of the Jordan and the nature of water. Wherefore, the human race doth glorify and hymn Thine appearance.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone IV, the composition of Cosmas the Monk—

He that doth clothe Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without shattering He fashioneth, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Polyeuctus received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tyrants and broke the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

Moved by Thy compassion, O God, in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy Thou didst seek out that which was lost and had perished, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, Thou hast come to the Jordan, giving utterance unto the mystery of the Holy Trinity. And, chanting hymns with faith, we cry out: Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, O Light unapproachable!

Glory..., Now & ever...,: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the shepherds’ pipes...”—

The Master of all hath mystically appeared to us in the streams of the Jordan to cleanse us of every sin, in that He is merciful and all-good. Let all creation then leap for joy, for Christ the Lord is baptized, Who as God hath been well-pleased to save the human race!

Glory..., Now & ever...: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with eight troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the martyr, with four troparia—

Ode I

Canon of the Feast \(originally written in iambic verse\), in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, which had straightway become as dry land; but the dark waters covered all the chief captains of Egypt together in a watery grave, through the mighty power of the right hand of the Master.

When the light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal men, coming forth from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan, Thou, O King of the Sun, didst bow Thy neck before him, that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the minions of darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.

O Word Who art without beginning, Thou hast buried man with Thyself in the stream, and Thou dost lead him forth new again, who had been corrupted by deception; and the mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Bestow upon me thy grace of prayer, O martyr,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Satisfied with much-desired sustenance, full of blessed radiance, and accounted worthy to join in the angelic chorus, O glorious Polyeuctus, save those who celebrate thy feast with praise and chant unto the Lord: For gloriously is He glorified!

Thy radiant and right renowned feast hath shown forth, full of light most divine, illumining those who with faith splendidly hymn thee, O most blessed Polyeuctus, valiant warrior of Christ, chanting unto the Lord: For gloriously is He glorified!

Strengthened by the might of the Spirit and invested with divine power, O blessed one, without hesitation thou didst go forth to contend with the prideful one; and, having mightily cast him down, thou didst cry aloud with zeal: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate and most pure Virgin Theotokos, while manifestly remaining a virgin, thou didst yet give birth unto the Incarnate One Who before had been incorporeal, Who in the richness of His compassion impoverished Himself for our sake, and hath saved those who cry to Him: Gloriously is He glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, and the teeth of the lions have been broken in their mouths. Let us then rejoice with great joy and open wide our mouths, weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, Who delighteth to bestow gifts upon us.

He who once assumed the guise of a malignant serpent and planted death in the garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he crusheth his own loathsome head.

The Master draweth to Himself the divinely crafted nature of man, which had been overthrown by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortal men, granting them a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come to cleanse our nature.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou didst exchange philosophy for piety, and wast accounted worthy of the divine vision of the Savior from on high, O Polyeuctus.

Desiring victory, O glorious one, thou didst spit upon all the things of this earth, and hast been vouchsafed heavenly delight.

Desiring the glory which passeth understanding, thou didst run with endurance and didst cast down the ignominy of idolatry.

*Theotokion:* Direct my steps, O Mistress, that I may go to thy Son with a praiseworthy life.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...”—

When the Savior bowed His head in the Jordan, the head of the serpent was crushed; and the decapitated head of Polyeuctus hath put the deceiver to shame.

*Ikos:* In the river Jordan the Creator of all, bowing His head, receiveth baptism; and, having invisibly crushed the serpents’ heads, He bestowed upon mankind power against the exceeding crafty one, who of old in paradise ensnared Adam with the fruit of the tree and brought upon him death without hope. Wherefore, the athlete Polyeuctus, in no wise yielding to the blandishments of his wife, suffered steadfastly, and, stretching forth his head, he put the deceiver to shame when it was cut off.

Sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning...”—

As a valiant warrior of Christ, the God of all, strengthened by His grace, thou wast turned wholly to His love, O wise one, through the faithful warrior Nearchus, who was with thee. Wherefore, having contended lawfully, thou hast been crowned by the Lord, as is meet, O martyr Polyeuctus.

Glory..., Now and ever..., the Sessional hymn of the Feast, in the same tone & melody—

Thou hast wrapped Thyself in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who dost most gloriously clothe Thyself in light, and Thou hast restored therein the nature of Adam, which had been corrupted by evil disobedience, O Word of God. Wherefore, we all praise and glorify Thy holy Epiphany.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, the prophet praiseth the restoration of mortal men; and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, he lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, Who hath broken the dominion of the mighty.

O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to repel utterly the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of men, and by Thy baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.

When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bore witness of Him to creation, and cried, plainly saying: “This is He Who was before me, yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to take away our hateful sin!”

That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the Word of God layeth siege to the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and, imprisoning him, delivereth creation.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

In thy pious confession, O most excellent one, thou didst bring thyself to the Master, lovingly accepting to become a sacrifice for Him, and being freed of every vice, O glorious one. Wherefore, thou criest to the Savior: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

In the sweetness of piety didst thou take delight, and thou didst soar aloft on wings of divine love. Wounded with pure and radiant desire, and aflame with the love of the kingdom on high, thou dost chant unto the Master: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Captivated by the supernatural unity of mind shown forth by Nearchus, and catechized in the godly faith in the Trinity by his words, O divinely wise martyr Polyeuctus, thou wast truly accounted worthy of the greatly desired and beauteous splendors of the martyrs.

Having enrolled in the army of the martyrs, thou didst receive the indestructible kingdom; and, newly slain, thou didst enter therein, still dripping with thy blood. And thou wast taken into the immutable joy and unwaning light, receiving great glories.

*Theotokion:* The Heavenly One, having likened Himself to those on earth, hath made them heavenly; and having suffered through His nature which is subject to human passions, He hath granted that we may partake of divine dispassion. Wherefore, knowing her who gave birth unto Him to be the Maiden who knew not wedlock, we glorify her as the Theotokos.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Washed clean of the poison of the dark and vile enemy by the cleansing of the Spirit, we have set out upon a new path which leadeth to joy inaccessible, which only they attain whom God hath reconciled with Himself.

Beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable bonds in the darkness of sin, the Creator raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, in the midst of abundant waters, He cleanseth him of the ancient shame of Adam’s inclination toward sin.

With piety let us eagerly hasten to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of salvation: and, gazing upon the Word Who is come forth from the incorrupt Virgin, let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the infirmity of the world.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

That thou mightest receive everlasting delight, O most blessed one, thou didst spurn the beautiful things of this life, the character of nature, pleasure, glory and life itself; and thou didst not lose hope.

Initiated into the divine mysteries of the image of God, by thy firmness of mind thou wast set apart for perfect struggles; and shown to be the victor, thou wast accounted worthy of unfading wreaths, O Polyeuctus.

Burning with zeal for piety and filled with divinely inspired ardor, O all-glorious one, thou didst piously reject most godless honor, being possessed of the wisdom which by its nature is inimical to evil; and thou didst set at naught the vain gods of the heathen.

*Theotokion:* Obedient to the words of thy mouth, O all-pure one, we call thee blessed, for, truly accomplishing mighty works with thee, the Lord hath magnified thee, and He hath shown thee to be the true Mother of God, having been born of thy womb.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* With a most blessed voice the Father made manifest His Beloved Whom He had begotten from the womb. Verily, He saith, this, the splendid Son, of the same nature as Myself, hath come forth from the human race. He is My living Word, Who by My providence is become a man.

The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly of the sea monster, emerged again, making manifest beforehand to all our regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth mankind.

When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the all-pure Word, descending in ineffable manner in the form of a dove; and he commanded the multitudes to hasten to the Master.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The abyss of my sins and the tempest of my transgressions discomfit me and thrust me down into the depths of violent despondency; but stretch forth Thy mighty arm unto me, as Thou didst to Peter, and save my, O my Guide.

Having manifestly displayed angelic zeal, O right wondrous martyr, thou hast been accounted worthy to enter the ranks of the angels. With them, therefore, earnestly pray, O blessed one, that those who hymn thee may be delivered from temptations.

When thy head was severed by the sword, O much suffering athlete, thou didst lovingly sleep the needful sleep. And now, abiding with the martyrs in the heavens, thou hast inherited an incorrupt estate.

Thou wast like unto the Savior, Who for our sake submitted to suffering on the Cross, and didst share in His suffering; and now, O blessed one, thou reignest with Him, as He promised, for time without end.

*Theotokion:* As thou hast loving-kindness, having given birth unto the Word Who loveth mankind, save us from cruel and violent circumstances; for thee alone have we, the faithful, acquired as an invincible intercessor, O most pure Mistress.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* He Who cooled the lofty flame that encircled the pious youths in the furnace, hath burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters; and with the dew of the Spirit He washeth away all the unbearable gloom of sin.

The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and Thou burnest up the baneful malice concealed in its depths, which calleth men to fall with faltering step.

When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over on dry ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.

We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the flood upon the earth to destroy every living substance that Thou hadst made. And now, O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal men.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst show Thy power to Thy servant, O Master; wherefore, with great fervor he went forth to his struggles unbidden. And, victorious, he chanted: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thy glorious and most renowned feast hath shone forth, O martyr; for it beareth the light of the manifestation of Thy Master and illumineth those who with faith cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Riches that cannot be stolen and dignity which abideth and falleth not away hast thou found; and thou hast received glory which lasteth forever, O wondrous one, chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Having conceived Him Who is understood to abide ever with the unoriginate Father, O Virgin, thou gavest birth unto the incarnate Son, that He might save those who with faith cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Creation is seen to be fire, and those who before were in darkness to be children of the light. The prince of darkness alone groaneth. Let the inheritance of all the nations which before was accursed now fervently bless Him Who hath brought these things to pass!

Sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, the three godly children plainly prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious falsehood with the fire of dew.

Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former sins.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Today thy feast of great supplication is celebrated with sacred rites, O Polyeuctus, martyred athlete of Christ; for thou wast a sacrifice right pleasing and acceptable unto Christ, Who was slain and sacrificed for thy sake. Him do ye children bless, ye priests hymn, ye people exalt supremely for all ages!

Having shown forth on earth an athlete’s opposition, even unto the shedding of thy blood, O Polyeuctus, thou hast come to dwell in a chamber of great splendor in the heavens, having been baptized in the laver of thine own blood, chanting unto the Master: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Raise up my soul, which hath been slain by my falls into sin, embracing it with the boldness of thy martyrdom, teaching it the divine precepts, O glorious one, and right fittingly turning it to the virtues, as it chanteth unto the Master: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou through whom we have found everlasting joy! Rejoice, thou who hast soothed the grief of Eve and turned the sorrow of Adam into radiant gladness! Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, who gavest birth unto the incarnate God, thou intercessor for the faithful who exalt thee supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O most pure Bride, O blessed Mother! The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding. Having received most perfect salvation through thee, we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, offering a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift.

That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in wondrous manner; for as it bore fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, who gave birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.

O King Who is without beginning, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and make perfect the nature of man, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal life.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Come, therefore, ye that love the martyrs, and let us hymn him who hath been crowned by God, whom the Most High hath glorified on His epiphany, which is named the enlightenment, and hath honored and crowned and adorned on this, his honored day.

With the streams of the blood of thy martyrdom which flowed forth thou didst choke the most malicious worker of iniquity, O divinely blessed one; and watering therewith the Church of Christ which doth ever bless thee faithfully, thou hast made it bright.

Be thou my helper, O martyr, delivering me from divers temptations and evil circumstances, loosing the bonds of heresy, and freeing from cruel imprisonment by thy supplication me who hymn thee with a pure mind, O most glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth, O most pure one, unto Christ, the head and fulfillment of the Law and the prophets, Whose good pleasure it was, in the unfathomable abyss of His loving-kindness, to become man for our sake through thee, and Who hath saved those who ever magnify thee with faith.

Exapostilarion of the martyr: Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

Having acquired the most desired riches of heaven and the glory and splendor which thy soul desired greatly, O blessed Polyeuctus, abiding in God thou didst receive a divine crown from the hands of the Most High, as a true member of the choir of the martyrs.

Glory..., Now & ever...; Exapostilarion of the feast—

Thou hast come in the form of a servant, O Word, and, though eternal, didst ask for baptism as a man. Heaven and earth, the ranks of the angels and the nature of water were stricken with awe. But the Forerunner, trembling, nevertheless performed his ministration in fear and joy.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “Go before us, ye hosts of angels...”—

Tell us, and say, O prophet Isaiah: Who is the one who crieth in the wilderness? Who crieth out: Draw ye therefore the water of purification with gladness? Even John, who baptizeth in the wilderness and crieth out: Christ is come! Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* The sea saw that, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

O, the ineffable loving-kindness which passeth understanding! How the Creator of creation inclineth His all-pure and divine head, providing through His baptism an example of humility for those who are illumined in Him. And therein we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?

The grace of baptism hath been poured forth for us as a living delight from the torrent of the Jordan; and having been illumined therewith through baptism, we say: Glory to Him Who hath appeared in the world and granted us life! Therein we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

Glory..., Now and ever..., in the same tone and melody—

As ones who have been led out of evil lands, come ye noetically, and let us cleanse our senses; and beholding Christ baptized in the flesh by John the Forerunner, let us all cry out with faith, chanting with him: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes: 6 troparia, from Ode IV of the canon for the feast.

