Also on The 9th Day of the Month of January

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints Philip, Metropolitan of Moscow & All Russia, the New Confessor

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Having made thine abode in the mansions of heaven, O holy hierarch Philip, standing with the angels before the throne of Christ, as a true hierarch and athlete, pray that we be granted remission of transgressions and peace and great mercy for our souls. *Twice*

Meekly entreating the tsar and boldly teaching him to maintain his kingdom undivided, O holy hierarch Philip, thou didst clear sins away from the furrows of thy soul and plant the word of God therein like seeds, which thou producest also for us, unto the salvation of our souls.

Thou wast the dwelling-place of spiritual virtues, and didst show thyself to be a holy hierarch and true confessor; for within thee, as in an honored temple, did Christ make His abode. Pray thou, O father, that we all be granted everlasting salvation and great mercy for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Assembling today, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with songs of praise let us hymn the adornment of hierarchs, the ornament of the fathers, the great intercessor for the Russian land, saying: Rejoice, O holy hierarch Philip, steadfast intellect, hallowed by grace and truth, who art thus become the receptacle of the all-holy Spirit! And now, standing with the holy hierarchs before the throne of Christ, pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. We entreat thee: Pray thou, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Thou hast been shown to be a habitation of the Holy Spirit, O holy hierarch, having within thee the Word of wisdom. O blessed Philip, entreat Christ God in our behalf.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

With hymns let us praise the star of Russia, for he illumineth with beams of light all who are in the darkness of ignorance shining upon them the light of divine knowledge.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Thou wast the dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, full of the grace of divine teachings, whereby thou dost water the world, O all-wise Philip.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, thou temple indestructible and surpassing holy; as the prophet crieth out: Holy is thy temple, wondrous in righteousness!

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of Orthodoxy, champion of the truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock. Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before the Christ, pray thou for this city, and the people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant: “Blessed is the man…:, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal...”—

O Lord, even though thou didst stand before John as a man, in the Jordan, yet, seated with the Father, Thou didst not depart from Thy throne. And, baptized for our sake, Thou didst free the world from bondage to the alien one, in that Thou art compassionate and lovest mankind.

O Lord, even though Thou didst surround Thyself as a man with the Jordan’s waters, yet from on high wast Thou confirmed by the descent of the Spirit, and the voice of the Father bore witness to Thee as His Son. But do Thou appear and grant incorruption unto our souls.

O immutable Lord, Who before time began wast begotten of the Father, Thou didst come in the latter days and didst take the form of a servant, and as Creator didst renew Thine image; for, being baptized, Thou hast bestowed incorruption upon our souls.

And 5 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross…”—

Rejoice, O sacred one, pure vessel of the Holy Spirit, holy hierarch Philip, divinely inspired instrument, unfathomable abyss of piety, adornment of the Church, great ornament of the royal city of Moscow, confirmation of Russia, helper of the oppressed, close follower of the apostles, emulator of the ways of Chrysostom! Thou didst manfully lay down thy life for thy flock, following the example of Christ, the true Chief Shepherd. Him do thou beseech, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

Rejoice, O mouth of lustrous gold, venerable and divinely melodious swallow, unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy, unassailable rampart of our city, refuge of the sorrowful, calm haven for the tempest-tossed, defender against misfortunes and tribulations for those who have recourse unto thee, thou who dost encourage us to chant hymns of divine beauty with zeal, emulator of the martyrs and confessors, who standest together with the holy angels, peer of the apostles! Unceasingly entreat Christ, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Rejoice, O sacred one, holy hierarch Philip, for like a sun of surpassing radiance thou shinest everywhere in thy teachings, and didst pasture thy flock on the fields of the Spirit, O thou who art unshakable, in that thou hast been founded upon the firm Rock! Hence, thou didst amaze the tsar with thy courage, praying that his rage be transformed into meekness, and warning him at the same time, for which he, unjustly depriving thee of thy see and thy flock, sent thee to the Otroch Monastery in the city of Tver’, where thou didst receive an undeserved death, praying for those who slew thee, saying: “O Lord, count not this sin against them!” Wherefore, O blessed one, a crown hath been given thee by Christ God, Whom do thou beseech, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Rejoice, O thou who didst bear the light burden of ascetic struggles, thou pure house of the Trinity, vessel of sweet savor, confirmation of the Church, equally enthroned with the apostles, adornment of holy hierarchs, glory of the martyrs and ornament of the venerable, renowned model of the virtues, splendid eminence of humility, defender of the oppressed and feeder of the poor! Entreat Christ, O blessed one, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Rejoice, and be glad, O most glorious city of Moscow! Celebrate with splendor, assembling together, O ye Churches of Christ! Dance, O divinely gathered flock! Today the universal festival of the archpastor doth summon us. Come ye, therefore, and let us radiantly celebrate his memorial, saying: Rejoice, O divinely wise and holy hierarch, who didst arm thyself with spiritual courage as with a breast-plate, and by the authority given thee by the one God didst infallibly rebuke those who would not heed thee! Rejoice, divine consolation for those who are troubled of soul, defender of the oppressed, right tranquil haven for all the faithful! Wherefore, surrounding thy most precious shrine, we venerate it with love, O holy hierarch Philip, and through thee we ask to receive the God’s love for man, that by thy supplications He may grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone II—

The Sinless One asketh baptism, that He may cleanse the world of the falsehood of the enemy. And the Master of all is baptized by a servant, and through water granteth cleansing unto the human race. To Him let us cry out: O our God Who hast appeared, glory be to Thee!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. Thus the righteous one who is dead shall condemn the ungodly who are living. For they shall see the end of the wise, and shall not understand what God in His counsel hath decreed of him. For He shall rend them, and cast them down headlong, that they shall be speechless; and He shall shake them from the foundations; and they shall be utterly laid waste, and shall be in sorrow; and their memorial shall perish. And when they cast up the account of their sins, they shall come with fear: and their own iniquities shall convince them to their face. Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him and made no account of his labors. When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit they shall say within themselves: “This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the saints? Therefore, have we strayed from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction; yea, we have gone through deserts, where there lay no way: but as for the way of the Lord, we have not known it.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; and the lips of wise men exude grace. The mouths of the wise teach wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them from death. When the righteous man dieth, his hope doth not perish. For the righteous son is born for life, and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. Light always shineth upon the righteous, and they find grace and glory from the Lord. The tongue of the wise knoweth what is good, and wisdom resteth in their heart. The Lord loveth holy hearts, and all are acceptable to Him who are ­blameless in their way. The wisdom of the Lord enlighteneth the face of him who hath understanding. For she overtaketh those who desire her, in making herself known unto them; and she is easily seen by those who love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and showeth herself favorably unto those in the ways. Evil never prevaileth over wisdom. For the sake of her I became a lover of her beauty. I loved her, and sought her out from my youth. I desired to make her my spouse, and I was a lover of her beauty; yea, the Master of all Himself loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a revealer of His works. Her labors are virtues, for she teacheth temperance and prudence, which are such things that men can have naught that is more profitable in their life. If a man desire much experience, she knoweth all things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of times and seasons. And she is for all a counsellor of good things. Moreover, by means of her I shall obtain immortality, for in the exercise of conference with her there is prudence. Wherefore, I prayed unto the Lord, and besought Him, and with my whole heart I said: “O God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast made all things with Thy word, and ordained man through Thy wisdom, that he have dominion over the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and righteousness! Give me wisdom, who sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. Send her out of the heavens, from Thy holy dwelling-place and from the throne of Thy glory, that, being present with me, she may labor with me, that I may know what is pleasing in Thy sight; and that she may lead me toward understanding, and preserve me in her glory. For all the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices are but uncertain.”

At Litia, these stichera—

*In Tone I:* As is meet, O father Philip, thou hast not forsaken thy homeland, but hast returned to the royal city of Moscow, where thou wast a hierarch hallowed by the Holy Spirit, and didst shepherd thy flock with great labors, bearing for its sake great oppression and dishonor, and enduring banishment; and thou didst suffer for it even unto death, and hast passed over, rejoicing, unto Christ. And now the Church, seeing thee again in its midst, hath been gladdened by thy return, for, receiving thy remains as a gift beyond price, it crieth aloud to the Master: By the supplications of thy hierarch, O Christ, grant unto Thy people forgiveness and great mercy.

*In Tone II:* An earthly angel, a heavenly man, a lover and beholder of divine glory hast shown thyself to be, having subdued the passions and enslaved the flesh, O Philip. O fellow sufferer with the apostles and peer of the martyrs, right zealously fulfilling the law of Christ, thou didst lay down thy life for the people; and now, standing before the throne of Christ, pray thou in behalf of us, thy children.

Thou wast an unshakable pillar of the Church of Christ, O father, for, afire with divine zeal, thou didst rightly and justly denounce injustice, didst exhort the tsar and the people to follow the Traditions of the apostles and the fathers, didst command that the division of the realm and wickedness cease, and didst manfully adjure them by the authority given thee by God. Wherefore, as a true pastor, thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock, O emulator of Christ the true Shepherd. And now, O hierarch Philip, pray thou that all who honor thy sacred memory with love may be saved.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

It is fitting that the royal city of Moscow ever have Philip as its hierarch, like a royal ornament, a treasure which cannot be taken away, who giveth to all the saving riches of confession, and gathereth all together to chant hymns of divine beauty. Unto him let us cry aloud: O holy hierarch and confessor, entreat Christ God in behalf of our souls!

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth order prevail. Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth the sinless head which no man fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let us exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all men, and illumining and granting mercy unto the faithful!

Aposticha stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O luminary Philip, by the adornment of divinely beauteous virtues thou becamest an all-pure habitation of the most Holy Spirit and a treasure which cannot be taken away, granting unto all inexhaustible riches for thou adornest us with the radiant exhalations of thy words as with golden ornaments; for the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth, O holy hierarch and father, as saith the prophet.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

O holy hierarch, thou luminary of the Word and right instructive tongue, the godly voice of the sound of thy teachings moving all greatly toward zeal for the majesty of God, thou wast an emulator of the apostles, O God bearer. Wherefore, having astonished the tsar with thy zeal, thou wast shown to be an heir to the kingdom of Christ. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Come, ye councils of Russia, and with hymns let us piously revere today the honored festival of the holy hierarch; for from his youth he was truly vouchsafed to receive the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, and having laid waste to his body with abstinence, through purity of spirit he hath been shown to be a ray of the light of the threefold Sun, and prayeth now in behalf of those who honor him.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Like a star of surpassing brilliance hast thou shone forth upon the city of Moscow in the teachings of thy words, O most blessed and ever-memorable Philip; for thou wast shown to be an all-wise preacher, and wast revealed as an heir to piety, confirming with true Christian teaching the tsar and people under thy care, that they abide in love and inseparable unity. And after thy repose, thou didst give thy pure and incorrupt body as a priceless ornament to the honored and far-famed monastery wherein thou wast spiritually reborn. And, as thou hast returned therefrom, after many years, to the royal city, we bless thee with psalms and hymns, and celebrate thy holy and most honored memory.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone IV, the composition of Cosmas the Monk—

He that doth clothe Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without shattering He fashioneth, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of Orthodoxy, champion of the Truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock: wherefore, as thou hast boldness before the Christ, pray thou for this city and the people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.

Glory..., Now & ever..., the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone I—

Thy blood crieth out from the earth like that of Abel, O wise hierarch Philip, thou new confessor; for thou didst not fear the wrath of the tsar, wisely teaching him and rebuking his vain-minded savagery. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ our God. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

Moved by Thy compassion, O God, in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy Thou didst seek out that which was lost and had perished, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, Thou hast come to the Jordan, giving utterance to the mystery of the Holy Trinity. And, chanting hymns with faith, we cry out: Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, O Light unapproachable!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone V—

O venerable and thrice-blessed sacred confessor Philip, thou good shepherd and favorite of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, thou didst lay down thy life for the people of Muscovy who were under thy care. Wherefore, O blessed and holy hierarch Philip our father, ask now of the Lord, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the shepherds’ pipes...”—

The Master of all hath mystically appeared to us in the streams of the Jordan to cleanse us of every sin, in that He is merciful and all-good. Let all creation then leap for joy, for Christ the Lord is baptized, Who as God hath been well-pleased to save the human race!

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Philip, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are those who dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

The Church of Russia, which thou deliverest from sickness and tribulation, now proclaimeth thee, O divinely blessed father Philip, who hast been shown to be a converser with the angels. Wherefore, though joining chorus with the apostles and martyrs, thou art still our helper amid sorrows, the consolation of the grieving, the shepherd and guide of the lost, O most excellent and blessed Philip. By thy supplications deliver us also from misfortunes, and pray thou to Christ God, that He grant remission unto those who with faith and love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Come, O ye faithful, let us behold where Christ was baptized, that after Him we may follow to the River Jordan, to the voice of one crying in the wilderness, and there may see the Creator of Adam touched by the hand of His servant, in His ineffable loving-kindness; and may cry aloud to Him: Thou hast come and revealed Thyself, to sanctify the waters in the Jordan!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Assembling, let us praise Philip, the emulator of the apostles, the all-blessed father and teacher, saying: Rejoice, O holy hierarch, steadfast of mind, sanctified by grace and truth, for which thou becamest a receptacle of the most Holy Spirit! And now, standing with the holy hierarchs before the throne of Christ, pray thou ever in behalf of thy servants.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast \(originally written in iambic verse\), in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, which had straightway become as dry land; but the dark waters covered all the chief captains of Egypt together in a watery grave, through the mighty power of the right hand of the Master.

When the light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal men, coming forth from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan, Thou, O King of the Sun, didst bow Thy neck before him, that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the minions of darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.

O Word Who art without beginning, Thou hast buried man with Thyself in the stream, and Thou dost lead him forth new again, who had been corrupted by deception; and the mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.

Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

O Lamb and Word of God, through the effulgence of Thy Holy Spirit send down upon my mind a brilliant ray of light, and inspire within me the words to praise him whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself: the sacred passion-bearer Philip.

O holy one, ask of God divine grace for thy servant, and fill my soul with understanding, that I may praise thy life, O holy hierarch Philip, wherein, by thy struggles, thou didst astonish all, chanting unto the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!

Kings marvelled at thy mighty courage and the effulgence of the great virtues which illumined thy deeds, O venerable one, for thy tongue never ceased to admonish them, and thou didst chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!

*Theotokion:* The words of the divinely eloquent preachers have been fulfilled in thee, O Mother of God; for, lo! thou gavest birth, O Virgin, to a little Babe Who is older than ancient Adam and is equally enthroned with the Father, unto the salvation of the whole world and the abolition of corruption.

Katavasia: The irmoi of Canon I of the feast of Holy Theophany.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, and the teeth of the lions have been broken in their mouths. Let us then rejoice with great joy and open wide our mouths, weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, Who delighteth to bestow gifts upon us.

He who once assumed the guise of a malignant serpent and planted death in the garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he crusheth his own loathsome head.

The Master draweth to Himself the divinely crafted nature of man, which had been overthrown by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortal men, granting them a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come to cleanse our nature.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord; my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies. I am glad in Thy salvation.

Thou didst hasten to ascend the mountain of the virtues, didst enter the darkness of vision, O holy hierarch Philip, and didst come to know, as far as it is possible, the nature of the Unapproachable One; and full of light, O father, thou didst receive grace divine.

Seeking the one God of goodness, and desiring to receive His glory alone, O blessed one, thou didst forsake the honor of thine earthly sojourn as something transitory, and didst shine forth as a favorite of Christ, the Master of all.

With desire for the Spirit thou didst cause the desire of the flesh to wither away, O blessed one, and within thyself thou didst wed purity as thy bride; and through purity were all the virtues begotten in thee, O ever glorious one, making thee a child of the immaterial Light.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst slay the noetic serpent who brought death upon Adam in paradise and grief upon Eve, our first mother. And having caused Life to spring forth, O pure Virgin, thou hast freed us from corruption, for God ineffably issued forth from thy womb.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

As the namesake and emulator of a chosen apostle, O father, thou didst endure tribulation and persecution. And emulating the zeal of the Prophet Elijah and the Baptist, thou didst manfully rebuke the iniquitous, and didst govern well the see entrusted to thee, running the good race until the end. And thou hast left thy body behind like a mantle, emitting myrrh redolent of perfumes, and pourest forth the grace of the Spirit like rain, mystically watering the furrows of our hearts. O holy hierarch Philip, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone V—

Thou hast wrapped Thyself in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who dost most gloriously clothe Thyself in light, and Thou hast restored therein the nature of Adam, which had been corrupted by evil disobedience, O Word of God. Wherefore, we all praise and glorify Thy holy Epiphany.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, the prophet praiseth the restoration of mortal men; and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, he lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, Who hath broken the dominion of the mighty.

O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to repel utterly the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of men, and by Thy baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.

When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bore witness of Him to creation, and cried, plainly saying: “This is He Who was before me, yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to take away our hateful sin!”

That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the Word of God layeth siege to the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and, imprisoning him, delivereth creation.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming, O Lord; wherefore he cried aloud: “God shall come out of Thæman!” Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

Those moved by malice against thee, the innocent lamb, sprang upon thee like wild beasts, and, unable to bear being pierced by thy words as with a pike, they were provoked to rage, O divinely wise and holy hierarch.

The whole world hath thee for its ally and help amid perils, for, as a faithful champion and a speedy intercessor, by thy sacred supplications thou dost rescue from dangers and misfortunes those who have recourse to thy care.

Having carried out the goodly struggles of Him Whom thou didst desire, O divinely wise namesake, thou hast been vouchsafed immortality, wherein, rejoicing, thou hast received the crown of victory, and criest out: Glory to Thine advent, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* Cast down the might of all the enemies who bring to grief those who hymn thee as the one who gave birth to the Lord of glory, O Mother of God, and preserve thy flock unharmed by the assaults of the wicked, that we may bless thee as is meet.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Washed clean of the poison of the dark and vile enemy by the cleansing of the Spirit, we have set out upon a new path which leadeth to joy inaccessible, which only they attain whom God hath reconciled with Himself.

Beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable bonds in the darkness of sin, the Creator raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, in the midst of abundant waters, He cleanseth him of the ancient shame of Adam’s inclination toward sin.

With piety let us eagerly hasten to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of salvation: and, gazing upon the Word Who is come forth from the incorrupt Virgin, let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the infirmity of the world.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Christ God, Bestower of light, Who didst dispel the primeval darkness of the abyss: disperse the gloom of my soul, and grant me the light of Thy commandments, O Word, that, rising early, I may glorify Thee.

Thine intercession hath been shown to be like a ray of the Sun of righteousness, shining with the splendors of the virtues, O holy hierarch Philip, dispelling the cloud of misfortunes which assail us. Preserve now in peace those who hymn thee, and glorify and illumine them with beauty.

Thy tongue was shown to be a two-edged sword, O blessed one, for, armed with the fear of Christ, thou didst wisely rebuke rulers, calling upon Christ, the King of all, as witness, and His divine apostles.

Thou wast shown to be a new man of zeal, like a second Moses, causing men to wonder not by performing awesome signs, but instructing them with the teachings of godly discourses, leading them forth from the passions of Egypt to the calm haven of the new Israel.

*Theotokion:* We call thee the noetic cloud, O most immaculate one, for from thee did Christ shine forth, and show thee to be more spacious than the heavens: for without knowing man, O pure one, thou gavest birth to Him Who became incarnate in His ineffable loving-kindness.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* With a most blessed voice the Father made manifest His Beloved Whom He had begotten from the womb. Verily, He saith, this, the splendid Son, of the same nature as Myself, hath come forth from the human race. He is My living Word, Who by My providence is become a man.

The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly of the sea monster, emerged again, making manifest beforehand to all our regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth mankind.

When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the all-pure Word, descending in ineffable manner in the form of a dove; and he commanded the multitudes to hasten to the Master.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the sea monster, O Lord. Save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

Thou didst make it thy general concern that those cared for by thee be one in soul and heart, O glorious one, abiding in the one Faith of Christ; thou didst uproot heathen customs, O wise one, and didst teach them to avoid divisions.

Moved by zeal for Christ, thou didst try to turn the rage of the sovereign into meekness, and wast in nowise daunted by the threats of the tsar, for, as thou art a doer of the commandments of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a mighty and brave warrior, suffering for thy flock even unto death with rejoicing.

We see thee, O holy hierarch Philip, as a light-bearing ray shining upon those in the darkness of life, and as an inextinguishable lamp burning with the immaterial Light, illumining all the ends of the earth and removing the gloom of ignorance.

*Theotokion:* In godly manner Moses, among the prophets, once prefigured thee, O most immaculate one, as a tablet of the law, the lampstand of the Light, the tabernacle, the rod which budded forth, the jar containing the Manna, and the ladder whereby we are led up from earth to the heights of heaven.

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Let us praise the all-wise Philip, the instructor of Orthodoxy, the proclaimer of the Truth, the luminary of Russia, who noetically feedeth his children with the food of his words; for with his tongue he sang praise, and with his lips he chanted hymnody, as an initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.

*Ikos:* Come, ye who love the martyrs, and, celebrating the memory of the hieromartyr with hymnody and spiritual songs, let us rejoice divinely. The time of our gladness and reward hath arrived, wherein we shall receive the gift of release from sufferings; for the pillar of fire hath appeared, burning the heads of the iniquitous, but illumining the souls of the faithful with teachings of divine knowledge, and leading us, the New Israel, to the divine city, the heavenly Jerusalem, in that he is a disciple of the grace of God.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* He Who cooled the lofty flame that encircled the pious youths in the furnace, hath burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters; and with the dew of the Spirit He washeth away all the unbearable gloom of sin.

The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and Thou burnest up the baneful malice concealed in its depths, which calleth men to fall with faltering step.

When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over on dry ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.

We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the flood upon the earth to destroy every living substance that Thou hadst made. And now, O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal men.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* On the plain of Dura the tyrant once built a furnace to torment the God-bearers; and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, and sang, all three together, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst stand before the Lord, adorned with the struggles of virtue and wearing a crown bejeweled with drops of thy blood, O holy hierarch Philip. Wherefore, be thou ever mindful of those who celebrate thy splendid memorial, and chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having fled the hordes of the noetic Pharaoh, O blessed one, thou didst easily pass over to the heavens, making thine abode there, receiving the honor of glory in the light of the righteous for thy patience, chanting in joy with the saints: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Those who have recourse to thy shrine praise thee, blessing thee with love, O blessed one, for, kissing thy relics which lie therein, they receive abundant grace: for by thy touch thou hast healed diseases of the eyes and cured pain of the teeth for those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Out of the love of my soul I cry to thee, O Mistress: O cloud of the all-radiant Sun, portal of salvation, gate of heaven, noetic ladder, accept the entreaty of all Christians who bless thee, the hope of our souls, and who cry aloud to thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Creation is seen to be fire, and those who before were in darkness to be children of the light. The prince of darkness alone groaneth. Let the inheritance of all the nations which before was accursed now fervently bless Him Who hath brought these things to pass!

Sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, the three godly children plainly prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious falsehood with the fire of dew.

Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former sins.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Thou Who coverest Thy chambers with waters and settest the sands as a bound for the sea: Thee doth the sun hymn; Thee doth the moon glorify; and unto Thee doth all creation offer a hymn forever, as to the Creator of all.

Thou dost freely heal those who call upon thee with faith, as, appearing to the paralytic, thou didst straightway raise him up, didst heal one suffering from a complaint of the liver by the touch of thy hand, and by thine appearance didst move to joy one suffering from despondency, O blessed one, ever doing these things for all, forever.

In that thou wast a victor, O most blessed one, with His life-bearing right hand the Creator hath set upon thy head the crown of suffering, an honor beyond price; and He hath preserved thy body unharmed by earthly wolves, emitting the sweet savor of perfumes. Thus hath the Judge of the contest glorified thee for all ages.

As a true pastor, O blessed one, do thou subdue arrogance and civil strife; drive away the wolves which rage against thy flock with the staff of thy supplications; make mighty the rule of our civil authorities, and put down the uprisings of the heathen, that we may hymn thee as our intercessor forever.

*Theotokion:* With the shield of the Faith do thou preserve thy holy temple, O Virgin Theotokos; vouchsafe thy glory unto those who together glorify thee therein, and deliver us from the assault and retribution of the barbarians; and still thou the raging waves of our mind by thy supplication, O most hymned one.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O most pure Bride, O blessed Mother! The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding. Having received most perfect salvation through thee, we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, offering a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift.

That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in wondrous manner; for as it bore fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, who gave birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.

O King Who is without beginning, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and make perfect the nature of man, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal life.

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Who hath exalted the horn of salvation for us in the house of David His child, wherein the Dayspring from on high hath visited us, and directed us to the path of peace.

Thou didst theologize concerning the one essence of the Trinity, and boldly denouncing those who taught vain things, O most wise one, and exhorting the faithful with thy godly instructions, thou didst wisely strengthen them. O holy hierarch Philip, dweller with the angels, preserve in peace those who celebrate thy memory.

For youths silence is a relative attainment, yet for fathers is it truly wondrous; wherefore, do thou accept this our thanksgiving, O father, not as truly worthy to serve for thy praise, but as offered unto thee with fervor: for we are unable to praise and magnify thee as is meet.

As one equally enthroned with the apostles, equally enrolled in the choir of the martyrs, and equal in honor with the holy hierarchs, O passion-bearer Philip, by thine intercession preserve those who hymn thee in peace, lift up the horn of our civil authorities, and set at naught the savagery of the barbarians, that, rejoicing, we may hymn and magnify thee.

*Theotokion:* O receptacle of the Light, divinely joyous Mistress, true confirmation of holy hierarchs and boast of all the venerable: from misfortunes and evil circumstances, and from the invasion of the heathen save us who hymn thee, the most hymned one.

Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

O holy hierarch Philip, lover of chastity from the days of thy youth, thou didst strive for the Truth, but wast punished and sent into exile, and didst endure a bitter death. And now, standing in the heavens before the throne of the Holy Trinity, do thou ever pray for us who celebrate thy memory with faith and love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—

Thou hast come in the guise of a servant, O Word, and, though eternal, didst ask for baptism as a man. Heaven and earth, the ranks of the angels and the nature of water were stricken with awe. And the Forerunner, trembling, nevertheless performed his ministration in fear and joy.

On the Praises, 4 stichera of the saint, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Thou didst finish the race and keep the Faith, O blessed and holy hierarch Philip; wherefore, Christ hath crowned thee with a splendid wreath of righteousness, and adorned thy confession, O right wondrous one. Therefore, receiving a heavenly inheritance, pray thou to the Savior in behalf of those who hymn thy memory. *Twice*

O blessed Philip, emulator of the confessors, be thou the advocate of those who fervently praise thee, and deliver us, O father, from all misfortune, sin and tempest, in that thou art a martyr of great might and a God-pleasing hierarch. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, pray for those who hymn thy memory.

O holy hierarch Philip, thou hast been shown to be a ray of the noetic Light, a luminary of the Church, the adornment of hierarchs, a true model of the monastic life of fasting, and our fervent ally, freeing us from the ruin wrought by the wicked. Pray thou, O father, in behalf of those who hymn thy memory.

Glory…, of the saint, in Tone VI—

Thou art a good shepherd and an excellent teacher, O holy hierarch Philip, and we ever cry aloud to thee in praise: With thee hath God adorned the church of His Mother, and thy body, which suffered in exile for thy flock, and was hidden in the earth for many years, hath He returned to thy cathedra, gladdening thy people. Wherefore, praying unceasingly for those who praise and honor thy memory, ask remission of sins and salvation for our souls.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone—

As ones who have been led out of evil lands, come ye noetically, and let us purify our senses; and beholding Christ baptized in the flesh by John the Forerunner, let us all cry out with faith, chanting with him: Blessed art Thou, O our God, Who hast revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!

Great Doxology Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IV of the canons of Theophany, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon of the feast, in Tone IV—

Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.

*Stichos:* O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endureth forever.

And the prokimenon of the saint, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335 \[Heb. 13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us; for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the sons of rams.

*Stichos:* The voice of the Lord is upon the waters.

And the alleluia verse of the saint, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \[Jn. 10: 9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep have I, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

Communion Verses—

The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath appeared.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

