The 10th Day Of The Month Of January

Afterfeast Of Holy Theophany

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints Gregory, Bishop Of Nyssa

Commemoration Of The Holy Hierarch Dometian, Bishop Of Melitene

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Marcian, Priest & Steward Of The Great Church Of Constantinople

For This Day We Provide Also The Service For The Holy Hierarch Theophanes The Recluse

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the holy Gregory, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father…”—

O venerable father, most sacred Gregory, thou blown by the breath of the Comforter, most manifest tongue of piety, greatly radiant beacon of divine effulgence, preacher of the Truth, foundation of theology, wellspring of exalted dogmas, torrent of teachings sweet as honey, harp played by God, delighting the minds of the faithful with divinely composed hymns: Entreat Christ, pray thou to Christ Who hath restored the world in the streams of the Jordan, O most wise one, that He save our race.

O venerable father, most honored Gregory, thou axe cutting off the assaults of the heretics, two-edged sword of the Comforter, scythe mowing down the tares of adultery, fire burning up the dross of heresy, true winnowing-fan of the Husbandman, whereby the heavy seed of doctrine is separated from the chaff, compass pointing all to the path of salvation: Entreat Christ, pray thou ever to Christ Who hath restored the world in the streams of the Jordan, O most wise one, that He save our race.

O venerable father, most blessed Gregory, thou mouth giving utterance to divine sounds, drawing forth salvation from the inexhaustible divine springs, and showing forth discourses and prayers unto all, thou rule directing all to virtue, who art enlightened by divine visions and illumined with the radiance of the uncreated Trinity, Whose invincible champion thou wast: Entreat Christ, O most wise one, pray thou to Christ Who hath restored the world in the streams of the Jordan, O most wise one, that He save our race.

And 3 stichera of the holy Dometian, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

He who of old threatened to destroy the whole earth and boasted that he would dry up the sea hath been shown today to be mocked by the faithful as a sparrow, as a most ridiculous gnat, whose semblance was stripped away like that of a scarecrow, and is trampled underfoot by the favorite of Christ.

Today, O ye faithful, Dometian doth summon us to the God-pleasing banquet. Let us dine with him with goodly cheer, and let us celebrate with him, honoring his corrections, and entreating the Savior of our souls, that He grant peace to the world.

O most honored one, thou didst return the talant of Christ which had been given thee, having increased it twofold by grace, as a good steward. Wherefore, thou dost hear: “O good and faithful servant, be it unto thee, as to My truly dedicated favorite, and enter now into the joy of thy Lord, receiving the reward of thy labors!”

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Having adorned thy discourse with wisdom and immaculate virtue, thou wast rendered comely in both, O Gregory of Nyssa, adorning and gladdening the people with thy God-proclaiming voice, and elucidating by reason the one Godhead of the Trinity, O all-wise one. Wherefore, having overcome alien heresies by Orthodox dogmas, thou didst exalt the might of the Faith in the ends of the earth. Standing before Christ with the immaterial ministers, ask those peace and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

The hand of the Baptist trembled when it touched Thine all-pure head; the River Jordan turned back, not daring to minister unto Thee; for if it was in awe of Joshua son of Nun, how could it not have been stricken with awe by its own Creator? O our Savior Who alone lovest mankind, Thou hast fulfilled all Thy dispensation, that Thou mayest save the world by Thine epiphany.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Let all creation chant new hymns unto Christ Who was born of the Virgin and is baptized today in the Jordan!

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

Let the Forerunner sound the clarion call of prophecy: Bring forth to the Lord, Who is baptized in the streams, the fruits of most excellent deeds!

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

The Spirit, akin to Christ in divinity, hath now come upon Him from the heights of heaven, ineffably beheld in the form of a dove.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Setting thy godly life aright, O divinely manifest Gregory, thou didst illumine thine activity with divine vision; for, loving wisdom with godly desire, thou wast enriched by grace from the mouth of the Spirit; and causing the sweetness of thy discourse to drip forth like honey from the honey-comb, thou dost ever gladden the Church of God with divine understanding. Wherefore, dwelling in the heavens as a holy hierarch, pray thou unceasingly for us who celebrate thy memory.

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Seeing Thee, Who in the Spirit and in fire dost take away the sin of the world, coming to him, the Baptist cried out, saying: “I am afraid and tremble! I dare not touch Thine all-pure head! Do Thou sanctify me, O Master Who alone lovest mankind, by Thy divine epiphany!”

Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their entreaties direct our life in peace.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

When this day falleth upon a Sunday, none of the hymns of the holy Dometian are chanted, but are transferred to some other day at the good pleasure of the superior and the ecclesiarch. Then the troparion “O God of our fathers…” is not sung here or at “God is the Lord…”, but the following troparion, for the holy hierarch Gregory of Nyssa alone, is chanted instead, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Showing forth godly watchfulness, thou wast revealed as a stern mouth of piety, O hierarch Gregory; for by the wisdom of thy divine doctrines thou dost gladden the fullness of the Church. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

And when the hymns of the holy hierarch Dometian are chanted, the following are added thereto:

Troparion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”

As one pure and full of divine illumination, thou wast given the task of tending the sheep of Christ God, O venerable father; wherefore, having adorned the vesture of thy hierarchal rank by asceticism and divers miracles, thou wast shown to be a marshal of the Church, a champion thereof.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Having become a vessel of the Holy Spirit, thou didst shine forth at the pinnacle of the Church of Christ; for, excelling in the grace of the priesthood through virtue, thou wast seen to be honored by all, O thrice-blessed Dometian, adornment of hierarchs.

At Compline

Canon of the Holy Marcian, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God Who wrought wondrous miracles with His upraised arm, and saved Israel, in that He hath been glorified.

Cleaving unto Christ Who buried sin in the streams of Jordan, with mighty gestures thou didst cause the torrents of the passions to dry up, O divinely wise Marcian.

In being baptized, Christ doth purify our weakness, which had become corrupt through the passions. Him didst thou please with thy zealous abstinence, O father Marcian.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst remain a virgin even after giving birth, for thou gavest birth unto God, Whom the great Forerunner baptized in the streams of the Jordan with great trembling, O all-pure Mistress.

Ode III

*Irmos:* May my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Almighty Christ God, Who established the second heaven upon the waters, and founded the earth upon the waters.

Descending, Thou hast hallowed the streams of the Jordan today, O Lord, and hast accepted the glorious Marcian as a gift, as a precious and beautiful offering, that he might glorify Thee.

The Lord, Who hath arrayed heaven in clouds, did clothe in the sacred vesture of the priesthood and in the reverence of the angels thee who on earth lived like an angel in the flesh.

Thou didst erect the sanctified temple of the divinely wise Anastasia, adorning it with sacred and precious appointments; wherefore, O Marcius, thou hast made thine abode with her.

*Theotokion:* He Who was born of thee, O Ever-virgin, drowneth the sin of our first father in the River Jordan, in that He is compassionate. And the Forerunner, when he was commanded to baptize Him, shrank from such a task.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst proclaim, crying: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ye mountains, exult! Ye hills, dance! Jesus, Who alone is pure, and Who hath illumined the memory of the venerable one, is baptized! By Him hath all the falsehood of the demons been cast into darkness and the whole world hath been enlightened.

Having mortified the carnal passions by abstinence, by thy divine utterance thou didst impart life to the bodies of the dead, kissing them at the time of their burial, O father, and straightway commanding them to lie peacefully until the general resurrection of all shall come.

Adorned with the beauty of divine virtues, thy life illumineth the faithful, and the shrine of thy relics emitteth rays of miracles upon those who approach with faith and praise thee faithfully, O father.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to Christ, the Wellspring of salvation, Who purifieth the wellsprings by baptism. The Jordan, seeing Him, turned back in fear, and John, baptizing Him, was filled with awe, O pure and most hymned Virgin.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, for we know none other God than Thee, and we call upon Thy name, for Thou art the God of the living and the dead.

Thou didst crush the heads of the serpents by baptism, O almighty Lord God, Who gavest power and authority to the divine Marcian over the power of the demons.

Sharing thy property with the poor, O divinely wise and most blessed one, thou didst distribute it; wherefore, thy memory and righteousness shall abide forever.

Thou didst still the turmoil of passionate thoughts, O venerable one, and didst erect a temple dedicated to divine Peace, unto the praise of the Lord Who is the peace of all.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast truly shown to be a virgin even after giving birth, O pure one; for thou gavest birth to God, Whom John washeth in the waters of the Jordan for the restoration of the world.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: Free Thou my life from corruption, O Good One! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

Bestowing upon us a torrent of sweetness, Christ is baptized in the streams of the Jordan, Who hath illumined the repose of the venerable one today.

The shrine of thy relics, O sacred Marcian, hath been shown to be a noetic phial pouring forth the ointment of miracles upon those who have recourse to thee.

With thy supplications, redolent of myrrh, thou didst repel the advance of the raging fire, and didst preserve unharmed the temple which thou hadst constructed, O divinely blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou givest suck to the Nurturer of all, before Whom the Forerunner, when he beheld Him, leapt up, crying: The deliverance and salvation of all hath appeared!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Studying the sacred Scriptures from childhood, O God-bearing Marcian, thou didst shine forth piety in godliness; for thou didst preach the Son and Word as consubstantial and equally enthroned with the Father and the divine Spirit. Wherefore, thou didst denounce the ungodliness of Arius and Macedonius, and didst elucidate the Faith, that it might be glorified in Orthodoxy. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy memory with love.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed thy youths in the furnace, O Savior. For the three chanted as with a single mouth, and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The only-begotten and beginningless Word of God, the Wellspring of life, hath risen up, washing away our transgressions with waters. To Him was the glorious Marcian well pleasing, offering himself to Him.

With right mighty vigils thou didst truly lull to sleep the passions of the soul which are difficult to restrain; and, falling asleep at a profound old age, O blessed one, thou didst pass over to the Light, as a child of the day and a minister of Christ.

The sword which guarded the tree of life let thee pass, O wise one. Wherefore, thou delightest in the joy of paradise, O sacred Marcian, hymning the Author of our salvation.

*Theotokion:* Without consuming thy womb, O pure one, Christ was divinely born of thee. And John, beholding Him, cried out: Jesus is baptized, the salvation and deliverance of the faithful!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the armies of heaven are in awe as Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests, glorify, ye children; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou hast given rebirth to men by Thy baptism, O greatly merciful God, Who on this day didst receive thy favorite, the godly Marcian, from earth into ineffable glory.

Seeing thee arrayed in royal vesture when thou didst serve as priest, O most blessed father, the sacred people were astonished and together hymned Christ, the King of all.

Thou didst acquire temperance, unceasing prayer, exalting humility, true love and dispassion, O father; wherefore, Christ hath given thee the grace of miracles forever.

*Theotokion:* In manner past understanding, O Virgin, thou didst contain the Uncontainable One. And the Forerunner, when he was about to baptize Him, was filled with awe, and trembling, cried out: “O Christ Who art fire, consume me not who hymn Thee with love!”

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, we magnify the Theotokos: the ever-flowing and Life-bearing wellspring, the Light-bearing lamp of grace, the animate temple, the all-pure tabernacle which is more spacious than heaven and earth.

Celebrate today, O men! Ye rivers and mountains, exult! Jesus is baptized! The Savior hath appeared, and by His epiphany He also glorifieth the holy repose of Marcian.

Having burst the bonds of the flesh, O venerable God-bearer, thou didst attain thine ultimate desire, beholding the splendors of the holy hierarchs, prophets and apostles. With them be thou mindful of us who honor thee.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou bearest in thine arms God Who with His divine, creative power doth nurture all things. And when the Forerunner saw Him asking for baptism, he was stricken with awe and with fear did what he was commanded.

Stichera of the saint, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O most sacred father, by the splendors of thy life hath the whole world been illumined and the deception of the demons been cast into gloom; and by the mere touching of thy shrine infirmities are driven away. For divine grace, illumining thy relics, looseth the darkness of the passions.

O right wondrous father, thou didst make thyself a temple of the eternal Godhead and didst erect sacred temples for the worship of the divine Trinity; and thou didst raise up the dead by thy voice, didst acquire a merciful character, and with diligence didst distribute thy wealth to those in need.

Thou didst manifestly cover the nakedness of him who entreated thee, O father, entering the holy temple naked thyself; and Christ clothed thee with divine raiment when thou didst celebrate the divine mysteries. And those who saw this marvelled at thy goodness, recognizing thee as a favorite of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone & melody—

“I fear thy coming, O Christ, yet I, Thy servant, will not oppose Thy command! Behold, I stretch forth my hand with fear; for I see descending from on high the Holy Spirit, Who is equal in honor with Thee and is enthroned with the unoriginate Father, bearing witness to Thee Who art baptized in the flesh!”

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the saints; Now & ever…: that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Today the Master hath come to the Jordan to be baptized in the waters by the godly Forerunner; and the Father bore witness to Him from high, saying: “This is my Son, in Whom I am well pleased!” And the Spirit appeared above Him in the strange form of a dove.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

It is the time of the Theophany! Christ hath appeared to us in the River Jordan! Come, ye faithful, let us draw forth the water of the remission of our sins! For Christ hath come in the flesh, seeking the lamb which had been carried off by wild beasts; and, having found it, He leadeth it back into paradise, in that He is compassionate. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan and illumined the world!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with six troparia, and two canons of the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of Saint Gregory, in Tone V—

*Irmos:* Bringing battles to naught with His upraised arm, Christ hath overthrown horse and rider in the Red Sea, and hath saved Israel, who chanteth a hymn of victory.

In that Thou art the Abyss of wisdom, the Treasury of understanding and Wellspring of goodness, O Christ, Thou dost enable me to hymn Gregory, the luminary of Thy glorious Church, with hymns.

O father Gregory, thou splendid adornment of holy hierarchs, accept this meager hymnody offered unto thee with love on the day of thy memorial, whereon do thou render Christ merciful unto us.

The unapproachable Effulgence found thy sacred soul cleansed of the mire of the passions. Wherefore, as He made His abode within thee, O father, He showed thee to be a light instructing the ends of the earth.

With rich and wise discourse, O Gregory, initiate of the sacred mysteries, thou didst teach the honored Church to theologize the Trinity as a Unity of three Members, equally enthroned and equal in honor.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Theotokos, let the Faith be reckoned as one, but not the demonstration of thy wonders which pass understanding; for thou gavest birth to the unapproachable Word of God, Who hath clothed Himself in humanity.

Canon of Saint Dometian, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

O God-pleasing father, subdue the uprisings of the flesh, the assaults of the passions and the warfare which rageth within my soul, and preserve it in a peaceful state.

Having touched the highest wisdom with desire and unwavering love, O venerable one, thou didst tame the flesh, didst reject the things of earth and didst truly become divine through communion.

The wondrous Dometian, raised up a little from the earth, passed from feeble strength to perfect power, and appointed ascents in his heart.

*Theotokion:* Having washed with the waters the matter of the flesh which He had assumed, the Lord made the humanity which He had received from thy virginal blood invincible to the hordes of the adversary.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* O Christ Who by Thy command fixed the earth upon naught and suspended its weight unsupported: establish Thou Thy Church upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, O Thou Who alone art good and lovest mankind.

Thou didst subdue the uprisings of the flesh to thy mind as master, and didst subject thy mind to the King of all. Wherefore, having trodden the path of the commandments without stumbling, thou becamest a magnificent habitation of the Trinity, O Gregory.

Thou didst fittingly arm thy soul against the rage of the serpent, O most blessed and venerable one, and, directing all thy desire unto God, thou didst take wing toward His incomprehensible and immutable beauty.

Thou didst join vision to activity, O father; wherefore, Christ entrusted to thee the governance of the Church, which thou didst blamelessly administer as a most excellent initiate of the mysteries of heaven, O most blessed Gregory.

Passing beyond the boundaries of the virtues, O Gregory, and appointing ascents in thy heart, thou hast been taken up from the earth by thy constant yearning for a dwelling-place in heaven before thy departure from the flesh.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, without enduring the pangs of maternity thou didst virginally give birth unto the Incorrupt One Who shone forth from the Father; wherefore, in Orthodox manner we proclaim as Theotokos thee Who gavest birth to the incarnate Word.

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

In his might the primeval enemy, who was unable to shake the might of thy soul, while thou didst show forth thy resolve exercised his wiles by assuming the form of carrion foul, to bring thee low.

The accursed serpent is justly annihilated by his arrogance and derangement, and hath been destroyed in the guise of dog-flies by exceeding great weakness, and lieth trampled beneath the beautiful feet of the righteous.

*Theotokion:* The preëternal Son Who was born of thee, O Virgin Mother, hath restored the world. In His baptism the Lord hath slain the serpent hidden in the waters, delivering men from corruption.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn of Saint Gregory, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Thou hast inherited divine effulgence, having lived an immaterial life, and hast shone forth in the priesthood for which thou wast named; for, supernaturally explaining the doctrines of the Faith, thou didst make the world steadfast in Orthodoxy. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of Saint Dometian, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

Adorned with the God-given anointing of the priesthood, O father, thou didst illumine it with the divine beauties of the virtues and with godly submission to Christ; and having finished thy course, thou criest out with the angels in the heavens: Glory to Thy compassion, O Savior! Glory to Thy kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone & melody—

When Jesus had been born of the Virgin Mary and was baptized by John in the Jordan, the Spirit, seen in the form of a dove, descended upon Him. Wherefore, the prophet said with the angels: “Glory to Thy coming, O Christ! Glory to Thy kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* Perceiving Thy divine condescension prophetically, O Christ, Habbakuk cried out to Thee with trembling: Thou art come for the salvation of Thy people, to save Thine anointed ones!

Thou wast seen to be a pillar most radiant in word and deed, O Gregory, burning with ardent zeal for Orthodoxy, leading forth the new Israel.

Receiving the grace of the Spirit, thou didst pull aside the veil of the Scriptures of the Old Testament and didst reveal to us the hidden beauty of understanding.

Showing forth the blessed aspects of all the virtues, Christ entrusted to thee, O Gregory, as to a minister of the word, the task of proclaiming them abroad to the ends of the world.

*Theotokion:* Without becoming subject to corruption thou didst conceive in thy womb without confusion and gavest birth without pain; and in giving birth to God in the flesh thou wast preserved a virgin even after birthgiving.

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Thou didst show that the law was the shadow of grace for the Jews who worshipped in the law of God, O wise one, and that the Gospel is the mystery of the true theophany, crying out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Shining forth from the east like a star of great radiance, thou dost illumine the Church, most reverently proclaiming Christ to be the Sun of righteous with wise demonstrations, crying out to Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having zealously cast off all wickedness and fleeting love, O father, thou didst illumine the ends of thy homeland with light, and didst rain wealth down upon it in a most abundant quantity of riches.

*Theotokion:* The Word, Who is the invisible God, receiving visible human nature from a woman, perfecteth and purifieth it in the river. He Who is alien to sin washeth away the transgression of him who fell.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* O Thou Who art clothed in light as with a garment: I rise at dawn unto Thee, and to Thee do I cry: enlighten Thou my gloom-enshrouded soul, O Christ, in that Thou alone art compassionate!

Like fire thou hast burned up the thorny and tangled words of heresies, and hast illumined the minds of the faithful, O blessed Gregory, initiate of the mysteries.

Thou didst denounce the iniquity of Eunomius and his words which were difficult to escape; and thou didst destroy the evil snares of his wiles like a spider’s web.

Thou didst denounce the most ungodly Macedonius who shamelessly reviled the divine Spirit as unrelated to Him Who Is, O most excellent Gregory.

*Theotokion:* Having seedlessly given birth for us to Christ, our righteousness and deliverance, O Theotokos, thou didst free the nature of our first father from the curse.

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

The Master of creation looked down upon the earth, O divinely wise one, and the foundations thereof shook and trembled grievously; but He did not reject the supplication of thy spiritual courage, O father.

Thou couldst not bear to listen to the mindless ones blaspheming against the heights of heaven and giving utterance to injustice, O glorious one, so thou didst turn them back with thy shepherd’s crook and didst cure the disease they spread.

Thou didst in no wise permit the confusion of those who preached that there is but a single nature in Christ, O divinely eloquent one, but didst ensnare them in the net of thy teachings and bring them up to the light.

*Theotokion:* With salt Elisha sweetened the bitterness of the waters, O Mother of God, and when thy Son and God was baptized in the water He removed the bitterness and pain of sin.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* O Christ Master, still Thou the sea of the passions which rageth with a soul-destroying tempest, and lead me up from corruption, in that Thou art compassionate.

Having acquired humility of mind, thou wast shown to all as a meek soldier waging war against those who seek to diminish the glory of Christ, O Gregory.

O Gregory, with thy rich discourse thou didst utterly refute the reasonings of Arius, the arrogant division and alienation which he believed to exist within the Trinity.

Sabellius, who wageth war on God, stupidly reasoning that there is a mingling and confusion within the Trinity, was denounced by thee, O most blessed Gregory.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother, thou gavest birth, and giving birth remained pure, truly bearing Him Who holdeth all things in His hands.

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is none to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak!

The oppressed people were delivered from the snare of death, and by thy supplications a multitude of sufferings was driven far away; for they had thee as their helper.

By thy supplication thou didst fend off the assault of infirmity, O most wise one, quickly hastening to the Virgin Mother of the Deliverer; for as a pastor thou couldst not bear to see the oppressed flock neglected.

*Theotokion:* The ranks of the angels were filled with awe, beholding the Invisible One born in the flesh of the Virgin, and Him Who is glorified immaterially entering the river to be baptized.

Kontakion of Saint Gregory, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels…”—

Keeping watch with the eye of thy soul, O holy hierarch, thou didst show thyself to be a vigilant pastor for the world; and with the staff of thy wisdom and thy fervent intercession thou didst drive away all the heretics like wolves, preserving the flock unharmed, O most wise Gregory.

*Ikos:* Through slothfulness have I, the wretched one, fallen asleep unto death; but as a most vigilant shepherd raise me up, O father, and lull to sleep the passions which cruelly torment me, that, rising up, in purity I may hymn thy splendid repose, which the Master of the universe hath glorified as is meet, as that of a most faithful servant, a most wise teacher, a friend and initiate of the mysteries, as guardian of His Traditions, the anointing whereof thou didst well preserve, O most wise Gregory.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers quenched the flame and bedewed the children, who sang together: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Having united thyself by desire to the effulgence of the threefold Sun of the Godhead, O Gregory, shining upon all like a mirror, thou emittest rays of light.

As a father thou hast left thy discourses, the purity of the ways of thy soul, and the fullness of understanding, as a treasure for those who chant with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Thou didst declare the Father to be the primal Mind and Cause, the Begetter of the Word, the Emitter of the Spirit, hymning the Trinity, saying: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, thou gavest birth to the incarnate God, a single Hypostasis in two natures; and to Him do we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

A true promise was manifestly made to the faithful; for the godly Dometian was granted the grace to loose infirmities and expel demons, proclaiming our praised and all-glorious God.

Having lived with us on earth in the flesh, the praised and all-glorious God of our fathers gave the grace of working miracles to those who followed and loved Him.

The godly Dometian cast down the evil heresy and teachings of Severus, and he divinely called the unadulterated Faith Orthodox, proclaiming our praised and all-glorious God.

*Theotokion:* When He became incarnate of the Virgin, the divine Word did not leave behind the Father’s nature; for He manifestly preserve her, and she remained undefiled in giving birth. And Christ, Who is all-glorious forever, receiveth testimony from the Father.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* The children, forming a universal chorus in the furnace, chanted to Thee, the Creator of all: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst receive all the radiance of the Comforter which descended, O blessed and venerable one, crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In the divine words of Christ, rivers of understanding flow forth upon us from thine inmost parts; for grace hath shown thee forth as a wellspring continually flowing upon the world forever, O father.

O the two wondrous brethren, akin in the flesh and divine in understanding! Honoring them, let us reverence Basil and Gregory together forever, as is meet.

When the noetic Light made His abode within thee, O father, He set thee forth as an ever-burning lamp for the world, hymning the one divine Light of the threefold Sun, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages.

*Theotokion:* O all ye works, as is meet let us bless her who, in manner past understanding, gave birth to the Lord, the God-man, yet remained a virgin, and let us exalt her supremely for all ages.

Canon of Saint Dometius

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst transcend all the laws of human nature and didst cleave unto God, thine uttermost desire, chanting to Him, O divinely eloquent one: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having hearkened to the divine commandments, thou didst generously distribute thy riches to those in need with the intent of submitting to it, O right wondrous one, and thou didst cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou wast full of healings, O Dometian, pouring forth drink, a wellspring, a torrent of sweetness, a river of peace upon those who cry: All ye works, hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* In the furnace the youths prefigured thee, O Virgin; Moses beheld the figure of thee in the bush; and David beheld thee giving birth, without knowing man, to a babe, the Lord of glory, Whom we exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon of Saint Gregory

*Irmos:* Rejoice, O Isaiah! The Virgin hath conceived in her womb and borne a Son, Immanuel, both God and man. Orient is His name; and, magnifying Him, we call the Virgin blessed.

Manifestly unable to praise the brilliance of thy corrections and discourses, O Gregory, our mind confesseth thy right laudable triumph and mightily giveth utterance to thy praise.

O most excellent initiation of the mysteries, standing now before the Trinity with the choirs of the angels, the prophets, the martyrs, the righteous and the patriarchs, be thou mindful of us who hymn thy memory, O Gregory.

Thou lookest down now from on high, O holy hierarch, defending the Church of Christ, granting victory to Orthodox Christians, and thou hast broken the yoke of slavery, saving those who sing thy praises by thy supplications, O Gregory.

*Theotokion:* As thou gavest birth to the Author of creation, O most pure one, thou bearest Him Who generated the beginning of all things, possessing supernatural and incomparable greatness. Wherefore, worshipping thine Offspring, we glorify thee.

Canon of Saint Dometian

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Thou didst suppress the desires of love, O father, holding fast to what is more perfect; and the habitations of the patriarchs and the ranks of the righteous and venerable have received thee. With them entreat the Almighty in our behalf.

Thy homeland hath kept thy much-suffering body as a precious possession hidden in its bosom, moved there by its maternal actions, O glorious one; for it could not bear for others to have the enjoyment of thee.

Come and be thou my help amid the perils and evil circumstances of life; still thou the tempest of the passions which riseth up against me, and bring me into the calm haven with the sail of thy prayers, O father.

*Theotokion:* Death stood against Thee, Who wast well pleased to become like unto us through the Mother who knew not man, that Thou mayest save us, O transcendent Son of God, and purify us with the waters and the divine fire of baptism.

Exapostilarion of Saint Gregory: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

With festive hymns let us all glorify the most wise Gregory, the good shepherd, the bishop of Nyssa, the brother in the flesh of the all-wise Basil.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—

The Savior appeared, grace and truth, in the streams of the Jordan, and He illumined those sleeping in darkness and shadow, for He, the immutable Light, hath come and appeared.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Now the Savior giveth to men a strange purification, kindling them, but not with fire, and building up souls without breaking them down.

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

O ye people, with gladness zealously draw forth the water of divine life from the wellsprings of salvation unto the deliverance of your souls.

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

Enlightenment hath come! Grace hath appeared! Deliverance hath dawned! The world hath been illumined! O ye people, be full with joy!

Glory…, in Tone IV—

O valiant contender for the right Faith, who didst battle as a goodly warrior of Christ God and didst please thy Commander: Contend now also for the Church with goodly struggle, preserving it by thy dogmas on an immovable foundation, O Gregory.

Now & ever…, the composition of John the monk, in Tone VIII—

Desiring to fulfill that which Thou hast established from before time, O Lord, Thou didst accept ministers of Thy mystery from among all creatures: Gabriel from among the angels, the Virgin from among men, the star from among the heavens, and the Jordan from among the waters, wherein Thou didst destroy the iniquity of the world. O our Savior, glory be to Thee!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode V of the festal canon, including the irmos; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of Saint Gregory.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Corinthians §151 \[I Cor. 12:7-11\]

Brethren: The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Matthew

§34 from the midpoint \[Mt. 10: 1, 5-8\]

At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: “Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and as ye go, preach, saying: ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

