Also on The 10th Day of the Month of January

Commemoration of Our Father Among the Saints Theophanes, Recluse of Vyshensk

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone II—

The Forerunner, beholding our Enlightener, Who illumineth every man, coming to be baptized, rejoiceth in soul and trembleth. He pointeth to Him with his hand and saith to the *people:* “This is He Who delivereth Israel, Who freeth us from corruption! O sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!”

When our Deliverer was baptized by His servant and borne witness to by the coming of the Holy Spirit, the angelic armies, looking on, were stricken with awe; and a voice was borne down from the Father in heaven: “He Whom the Forerunner baptized with his hand is My beloved Son, in Whom I have been well-pleased!” O Christ our God, glory be to Thee!

The currents of the Jordan received Thee, the Wellspring, and the Comforter descended upon Thee in the form of a dove. Thou Who bowed down the heavens dost bow Thy head, and clay crieth out to the Potter: “What dost Thou command me to do, O Thou Who art greater than I? It is I who must needs be baptized of Thee! O sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!”

And 5 of the saint, in Tone I—

Come, O ye faithful, and let us piously bless Theophanes, the holy hierarch of Christ, the all-good shepherd, the teacher of golden discourse, the comforter of the sorrowful, the guide of all who have recourse unto him with faith, and who now prayeth in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

O holy hierarch Theophanes our father, thy memorial hath shone forth on us like the radiant sun, enlightening those who approach thee with faith and earnestly entreat thee: Pray that our souls may be saved! *Twice*

O all-blessed father Theophanes, man of God and faithful servant, chosen vessel of the Holy Spirit, heir to the kingdom of God: Ask peace for the Orthodox Church, prosperity for our land, and for all the faithful confirmation in the Faith, remission of sins and deliverance from misfortunes.

Glory…, in the same tone—

O divinely wise father Theophanes, even though thou didst run the race in secret struggles, yet wast thou shown to the people to be an all-radiant beacon, enlightening us with the rays of thy words; and thou dost teach all to know Christ. Wherefore, joyfully bowing down before the shrine of thy precious relics, we cry out with compunction: Glory to Him Who glorifieth His saints!

Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II—

Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may glorify Thee, O Savior, the Enlightener of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon.

When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the light, she is found preëminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither bethought those who Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.

At Litia, these stichera, in Tone III—

O all-blessed Theophanes, all-glorious wonder-worker and helper of the faithful, vessel full to overflowing with grace, and wellspring of mercy: Pray to the Lord in our behalf, that our souls may find mercy.

O divinely wise father Theophanes, good and faithful friend of the Lord, adornment of hierarchs and glory of the fathers: As when thou wast alive, so after thy repose hath God, Who is wondrous in His saints, given thee the grace of healings. Pray now unceasingly to the Lord in our behalf, that our souls may find mercy.

O all-blessed Theophanes, faithful keeper of the words of the Gospel, who didst take up voluntary poverty as it were a treasure, and didst preserve the purity of the monastic life, providing a model of humility after the example of thy Lord: Standing now before the throne of the Almighty, pray thou earnestly in behalf of us who keep thy sacred memory.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Today is the Monastery of Vyshensk adorned, and the whole Orthodox Church keepeth festival, celebrating thy memorial, O holy hierarch Theophanes; for through thee did the Lord reveal wondrous and all-glorious miracles when He was pleased to glorify thy precious relics . Wherefore, we hasten to thee and pray: Make entreaty for us unto the Lord, that our souls may find mercy.

Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth order prevail. Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth the sinless head which no man fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let us exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all men, illumining and granting mercy unto the faithful!

Aposticha stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, O Theophanes our father, swift consoler amid sorrows! Rejoice, guide of monks and nuns! Rejoice, thou who leadest all to God by thy words and deeds! And now, standing before the throne of the Holy Trinity, pray thou earnestly in behalf of us who celebrate this radiant solemnity.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theophanes, all-glorious adornment of the Church of Russia, bright boast of the Monastery of Vyshensk, unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy! Rejoice, O our advocate before God, before Whom thou standest with all the saints! Pray for us who honor thy holy memory.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Rejoice, O hierarch of God, image of humility and meekness, inexhaustible treasury of love! For even if thou didst abide in seclusion, thou didst not forsake those who thirsted for spiritual consolation. Wherefore, we flee to thee as to our father, and cry out with love: Pray unto the Lord in our behalf, that our souls may find mercy!

Glory…, in the same tone—

O all-blessed father Theophanes, having acquired purity of mind, thou wast shown to be a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, abiding in seclusion for many years in the Monastery of Vyshensk; and with thy writings thou hast enlightened all who have recourse to thee with faith. And now, never cease to offer entreaties in behalf of us who honor thy sacred memory.

Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI—

Beholding the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin asking for baptism in the Jordan, the radiant luminary who shone forth from the barren woman cried out to Him with fear and joy: “Do Thou sanctify me by Thy divine epiphany, O Master!”

Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII—

O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, ascetic of Vyshensk, divinely wise and holy hierarch Theophanes: By thy writings thou didst explain the Word of God, and hast shown the way to salvation unto all the faithful. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the saint; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

Resting in thee, O holy hierarch Theophanes, Christ the Lord, the Light from Light which is unapproachable, showed thee forth to the world as all-brilliant, for thou art radiant in thy splendid life, sheddest rays of doctrines, and shinest forth miracles. Wherefore, we now celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Thou didst sanctify the streams of the Jordan and didst crush the might of sin, O Christ our God; Thou didst bow Thy head beneath the hand of the Forerunner and hast saved the human race from deception. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: Save Thou our souls!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

Resting in thee, O holy hierarch, Christ the Lord, the Light from Light which is unapproachable, showed thee forth as a zealous witness to the Truth in His Church, unto the joy and salvation of all who honor thy memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Wherefore didst thou marvel, O River Jordan, seeing the Invisible One naked? “I beheld and trembled,” it said, “for how could I have desired not to be filled with awe of Him and withdraw?” The angels were filled with fear, beholding Him; heaven was affrighted, and the earth quaked; the sea, and all things visible and invisible, were troubled. Christ appeared in the Jordan, to sanctify the waters.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Theophanes, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are those who dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever...Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

O all-wise teacher, steadfast champion of the Truth of Christ, make our hearts steadfast in the Orthodox Faith, for to thee do we flee and to thee do we pray: Entreat the Lord in our behalf, O holy hierarch Theophanes our father.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O all-pure Theotokos, invincible intercessor for the afflicted and fervent help of those who trust in thee: Deliver us from misfortunes and temptations.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, §35 from the midpoint \[Jn. 10: 1-9\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All who ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Grace poured forth in thy lips, O holy hierarch Theophanes, and thou wast truly shown to be a preacher of the revelation of God in the land of Russia; for by thy writings thou teachest all to believe in the Trinity, the one Godhead.

Canon \[I\] of the feast, with 6 troparia; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of the saint, the acrostic whereof is “Rejoice, O Theophanes, ascetic of Vyshensk”, with 8 troparia, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Joyfully offering up laudation, and falling down humbly before thee, we ask: Accept our unworthy supplication, O holy hierarch Theophanes our father.

O earthly angel and heavenly man, abiding in seclusion in the Monastery of Vyshensk, and praying unceasingly to the Lord, thou didst make plain for all the path to salvation.

Having assembled today, O ye faithful, with hymns and spiritual songs let us praise the holy hierarch Theophanes, our true advocate before God.

*Theotokion:* Make us steadfast, O Mother of God, in belief in thy Son and God, Who wondrously glorifieth His saints and calleth them His friends.

Ode III

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

O holy hierarch Theophanes, thy name hath perfumed our land like myrrh, delighting the hearts of the faithful, and calling all to spiritual joy and salvation.

O Theophanes, saint of God well-pleasing to Christ, look upon our infirmities, and heal thou our souls, which are ever bestormed by the passions.

Like an industrious bee hast thou gathered for us the honey of the writings of the fathers from the meadow of the Spirit, O holy hierarch, for the salvation of those who have recourse to thee in prayer.

*Theotokion:* O holy hierarch Theophanes, come and stand with us, that together we may glorify the all-holy Virgin who gave birth to Christ God.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone VIII—

Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the saints, O Theophanes, saint of God; and standing now at the throne of the Almighty, pray for us, O most blessed one, that the Lord may save our souls.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I—

When Jesus had been born of the Virgin Mary and was baptized by John in the Jordan, the Spirit, seen in the form of a dove, descended upon Him. Wherefore, the prophet said with the angels: “Glory to Thy coming, O Christ! Glory to Thy kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!”

Ode IV

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

O holy hierarch Theophanes, thou didst wisely commit thine understanding unto Christ, and wast vouchsafed the eternal kingdom. Beseech Him now Who hath created all things in His wisdom, that He save our souls.

Entreat now Him Whom thou didst love, Whom alone thou didst desire, and for Whose sake thou didst struggle in seclusion, that He save our souls.

For the flock given thee by God thou wast a model in word, life, love, spirit, faith and purity; wherefore, we honor thee as a true pastor, O Theophanes our father.

*Theotokion:* O divinely wise Theophanes, make supplication in our behalf to the all-holy Mistress, the Theotokos, that by her omnipotent intercession she may beseech Christ to save our souls.

Ode V

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

The angels rejoice in heaven, and men keep spiritual festival on earth, celebrating the memory of the holy hierarch Theophanes, the wondrous advocate for us all.

O blessed Theophanes, teach us to know Christ, the Light of truth, Who enlighteneth every man who cometh into the world.

Him Whom the armies of heaven glorify thou didst unceasingly glorify in thy life. O saint of God, teach us also to glorify the Lord with the virtues.

*Theotokion:* With hymns let us honor the Mistress of the world, who is more exalted than the heavens and more pure than the rays of the sun, and hath delivered us from the curse \[of our first parents\].

Ode VI

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou didst tread the narrow path to salvation, and as one meek didst cry unceasingly to the Meek One: It is good for me to cleave unto God!

Desiring the Truth of Christ, thou didst joyfully endure tribulations and afflictions, ever mindful that as there is no crown save there be a victory, so is there no victory except there be struggle.

As thou abidest in the house of the heavenly Father, O father Theophanes, forget not us, thy children, but by thy supplications vouchsafe that we also may enter the wedding-chamber of the Lord of glory.

Thou didst spurn the glory and all the riches of the world, setting thy steps unwaveringly toward the world on high; and thou now rejoicest with angelic joy, O holy hierarch Theophanes, our father.

*Theotokion:* Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who doth not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? Entreat thy Son and God, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls may find mercy.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone IV—

O holy hierarch Theophanes, namesake of the Theophany: By thy teachings thou didst enlighten many of the people. And standing now with the angels before the throne of the Holy Trinity, pray thou unceasingly in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Thou hast truly been shown to be a revelation of divine gifts to the land of Russia, O holy hierarch Theophanes, good shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching them by thy way of life and guiding them by thy discourse and writings. And now, standing before the throne of the all-holy Trinity, and lifting up thy venerable hands with boldness, pray thou unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having the way of the cross of Christ, the Judge of the contest, continually before thee, thou didst tread the narrow path that leadeth to life everlasting, O blessed one, crying out unceasingly: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

In zeal thou didst emulate Elijah the Tishbite, O holy hierarch Theophanes; and setting thy heart afire with love divine, in patience thou didst possess thy soul, crying out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

O father Theophanes, zealous preacher of divine Truth, guided by the wisdom of thy words and teachings we now chant with thee: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Grant consolation to thy servants, O Theotokos Mary, that with thee we may cry out to thy Son and our God: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon I of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ye children, bless! Ye priests, chant! Ye people, exalt Christ forever, celebrating the great solemnity of the glorification of the favored one of God, the holy hierarch Theophanes!

As is meet, thou didst teach all to hymn the glory of God, O Theophanes, preacher of piety. Teach this also unto us who now approach thee with faith, that the name of God may be glorified forever.

O Theophanes, steadfast champion of the Faith, wise preacher of piety, excellent theologian of Orthodoxy, recluse of Vyshensk: Vouchsafe that we, the unworthy, may in spiritual joy hymn the Lord, Who is exalted supremely for all ages.

*Theotokion:* Thou ever givest streams of healings to the faithful, O Mother of God. Heal thou our souls through the supplications of Theophanes, the favorite of God, that we may glorify and supremely exalt thy birthgiving, O all-pure one, for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou hast been vouchsafed eternal life, O holy hierarch. Be thou a fervent mediator and advocate before God for us who celebrate thy sacred memorial with faith.

Thou hast been shown to be a new wonder-worker, O divinely wise Theophanes, a most merciful healer and an unmercenary physician of the souls and bodies of all who have recourse to thee with faith, having pity, consoling, and pouring forth thy compassions in abundance.

Truly thou hast been shown to be a fervent advocate for us before God, O father. Beg thou the Creator of all things, that He grant remission of transgressions unto all who magnify thee with faith and love.

O man of God, faithful friend of Christ, mercifully accept our entreaties, and bear them to the throne of the glory of the Lord Who by His baptism sanctified the streams of the Jordan.

*Theotokion:* Him Whom the armies of heaven glorify thou didst bear in thy womb, O all-pure Mother of God. Entreat Him to have compassion and save our souls.

Exapostilarion of the saint—

Rejoicing, with hymns let us honor the holy hierarch Theophanes, the luminary enlightened from on high, resplendent with light divine.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

The Savior appeared, grace and truth, in the streams of the Jordan, and He illumined those sleeping in darkness and shadow, for He, the immutable Light, hath come and appeared.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, the composition of Patriarch Germanus, in Tone I—

Christ our Savior, the Light of Light, hath shone forth upon the world, manifesting Himself as God. Let us worship Him, O ye people!

How can we who are servants honor the Master as is meet? For He hath restored us all in the waters.

Baptized in the Jordan, touched by Thy servant’s hand, O our Savior, Thou didst sanctify the waters, healing the sufferings of the world. Great is the mystery of Thine epiphany! O Lord Who lovest mankind, glory be to Thee!

And 3 of the saint, in Tone VII—

Thy God-pleasing life hath now shone forth upon us, O holy hierarch Theophanes our father, recluse of Vyshensk, for thou didst make all carnal knowledge subject to thy spirit. Pray for us who celebrate thy sacred memorial, that the Lord may save our souls.

Thou wast shown to be an image of monastic struggles and temperance, and an inexhaustible treasury of love and humility; wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, we glorify Christ Who hath crowned thee. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He save our souls.

O Theophanes, thou man of God and faithful servant of Christ, lover of stillness, who didst converse alone with the one God: Be thou mindful of us who honor thy holy memory, and bear thy fervent supplications to the Lord, that He may save our souls.

Glory…, in the same tone—

O wise preacher of piety, excellent theologian of Orthodoxy, thou didst explain to the people the mysteries of the spiritual life, and thus didst bring many to believe in the triune God. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, O God-bearing father Theophanes, we cry out with thee: O Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee!

Now & ever…, of the feast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II—

Today Christ hath come to be baptized in the Jordan! Today John toucheth the head of the Master! The hosts of heaven were in awe, beholding this all-glorious mystery; the sea saw and fled, the Jordan, seeing it, turned back. But we, illumined, cry out: Glory to God Who hath appeared, was seen on earth and hath illumined the world!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode V of Canon I of the feast; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon of the feast, in Tone IV—

Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.

*Stichos:* O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endureth forever.

And that of the saint, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335 \[Heb. 13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, of the feast, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the sons of rams.

*Stichos:* The voice of the Lord is upon the waters.

And that of the saint, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \[Jn. 10: 9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

Communion Verses—

The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath appeared.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

