The 11th Day Of The Month Of January

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Theodosius The Cœnobiarch

At Vespers

We chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, we chant 6 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father…”—

O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, thou didst struggle mightily in this transitory life, and wast a model for thy disciples in hymnody, fasting and the keeping of vigil. And now thou joinest chorus with the incorporeal ones, unceasingly glorifying Christ: God the Word and Deliverer, Who is from God, Who bowed His head before the Forerunner, and hath sanctified the nature of water. Him do thou entreat, to Him do thou pray, O venerable one, that He grant unto the Church oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, having found thy soul pure, as it desired, the grace of the All-holy Spirit dwelt within thee as an all-holy light, and with its activity thou wast splendidly adorned. Thou didst unceasingly glorify Christ, the one Son in two natures, Who is baptized at the hand of the Forerunner, and borne witness to by the Father’s voice. Him do thou beseech, to Him do thou pray, O venerable one, that He grant to the whole world oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, abundantly hast thou been vouchsafed the blessed life, having acquired it through purity and fasting; for, having lived, thou wast borne over to the life on high, telling all to rejoice. With the incorporeal ones thou dost unceasingly glorify Christ, Who ineffably took flesh of the Virgin, and hath drowned our sins by His baptism in the Jordan’s streams. Him do thou entreat, to Him do thou pray, O holy one, that He grant to the whole world oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…: in Tone II—

O venerable father, the river’s streams, the waters of remission, made glad thy sacred soul like a city of the living God, Christ our God Who crossed the Jordan and hath poured forth the word of piety upon all the ends of the earth. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed Theodosius, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: in the same tone—

Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may glorify Thee, O Savior, Thou Enlightenment of our souls.

Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \[5:15-6:3\]

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgement for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \[3:1-9\]

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \[4:7-15\]

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that which is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: Thou hast given a sign…”—

Having humbled Himself in manner past understanding, the Lord said: “Thou hast seen how I have clad Myself in thine image, which I Myself have created. What, then, is so strange, My friend, if I also bow beneath the hand of thee who art one of my followers; and if, naked, I clothe Myself in the waters? For, in that I am compassionate, I wish to clothe the naked in everlasting incorruption.”

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

“Thou hast shown Thyself to be incarnate, yet the womb which received Thee remaineth unconsumed; for the furnace which did not consume the youths long ago serveth as an image thereof. But how can I, who am grass, touch Fire with my hand, O Jesus Almighty, Thou Savior of our souls, before Whom all in heaven and on earth do tremble?”

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, O Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

“In the waters of the Jordan do thou wash Me, Who in nowise am defiled,” the Lord said; “and human nature which hath been defiled by the transgression of Adam, will be washed clean as new. For when I am baptized all men will be renewed by water and the Spirit.”

Glory…: in Tone VIII: the composition of the Studite—

Multitudes of monks honor thee as their instructor, O Theodosius our father. For, following thy steps, we have truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, having labored for Christ, didst denounce all the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: in the same tone—

The angelic armies were stricken with awe at what they beheld, when Thou, O Savior, didst stand naked in the waters, and bowed Thine all-pure head to be baptized by John. For when, of Thine own will, Thou didst impoverish Thyself, the world was made rich. Glory to Thee, O Lord!

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst cultivate the barren desert; and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; and thou wast a beacon for all the world, emitting miracles. O Theodosius our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: the troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the venerable one; Now & ever…, that of the feast.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Joshua son of Nun, leading the people and the ark of God across the Jordan River, was a shadowy image of the benefaction which was to come: for, in the Spirit, the mystic crossing doth represent both an image of our restoration and a true picture of our regeneration. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

Beholding the Word, Who is equal in honor to the Father and the Spirit, incarnate and baptized in His loving-kindness, the choirs of the angels trembled. And the River Jordan, stricken with awe and fear, turned back, bearing up to the summit of salvation us who have become corrupt through the passions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Polyeleos, and this Magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Theodosius, and we honor thy holy memory, thou instructor of monastics and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm Verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, sessional hymn in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith…”—

Lifting up thy hands to the divine summit, thou wast shown to be a pillar of light, resplendent with beams of prayer, O venerable one. For, furnishing thy mind with wings to soar aloft to the heavens, thou hast illumined all, as a partaker of ineffable things, praying to Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Today the Master hath come to the Jordan, to be baptized in its waters by the divine Forerunner. And the Father hath borne witness from on high, saying: “This is My Son, in Whom I am well pleased!” And the Spirit hath appeared over Him in the strange form of a dove.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto God for all that He hath rendered unto me?

“Let every breath praise the Lord.”

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[Lk. 6: 17-23\].

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast \(originally written in iambic verse\), with 8 troparia, in Tone II, the composition of John of Damascus—

*Irmos:* Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, which had straightway become as dry land; but the dark waters covered all the chief captains of Egypt together in a watery grave, through the mighty power of the right hand of the Master.

When the light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal men, coming forth from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan, Thou, O King of the Sun, didst bow Thy neck before him, that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the minions of darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.

O Word Who art without beginning, Thou hast buried man with Thyself in the stream, and Thou dost lead him forth new again, who had been corrupted by deception; and the mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.

Canon of the Venerable One, with 6 troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

As our wise general, O father Theodosius, do thou in godly manner lead the hymn to Christ God, Who came to save the whole world and with Himself hath glorified thy most holy memory.

The Forerunner of Christ, who sprung forth from Elizabeth of the lineage of Aaron, came from the desert; and Theodosius, reborn through the Spirit in the font of baptism, became a citizen of the desert, following after Jesus.

When Christ was baptized in the streams, the arrogance of the Israelite synagogue was cast down, and the angelic way of life was planted in the Church, which thou didst steadfastly lead, O most blessed Theodosius.

Sharing, through asceticism, in the suffering of Him Who, for our sake, was nailed to the Cross, O father Theodosius, thou didst also worthily emulate His resurrection, and becamest an heir to glory.

*Theotokion:* The divine choir of maidens doth in manner most divine call thee comely among women and adorned with the beauties of godliness, O Mistress Theotokos; for in manner past recounting thou gavest birth unto the beneficent Word.

*Katavasia, Tone II:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, and the teeth of the lions have been broken in their mouths. Let us then rejoice with great joy and open wide our mouths, weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, Who delighteth to bestow gifts upon us.

He who once assumed the guise of a malignant serpent and planted death in the garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he crusheth his own loathsome head.

The Master draweth to Himself the divinely crafted nature of man, which had been overthrown by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortal men, granting them a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come to cleanse our nature.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

The Lord Who covered the chambers with the waters hath clad His body in the streams of the Jordan; and therein hath my heart been established.

The divine light which shone forth in the Jordan hath shown thee to those on earth as a divinely bestowed scion of blessing and goodwill, O Theodosius.

Thou didst forsake the world and the things of the world, O venerable Theodosius, emulating the Master’s nakedness in the Jordan.

Taking the Cross of the Savior upon thy shoulder, thou didst hasten to His tomb, like a deer unto springs of saving water, O most blessed Theodosius.

*Theotokion:* At thy birthgiving, the ranks of the angels were stricken with awe, and the hearts of men were filled with fear; wherefore, we honor thee with faith, O Theotokos.

*Katavasia:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having adorned thy soul in godly manner with abstinence, pangs and prayer, thou becamest a companion of the martyrs, O blessed one, and didst truly receive gifts of miracles, to heal the afflictions of those who honor thee with faith. Wherefore, driving out multitudes of the demons, thou bestowest healings upon men through grace, O God-bearer Theodosius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith celebrate thy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of Theophany, in the same tone—

Jordan ministereth to Thee with its streams, and John stretcheth out his corruptible hand unto Thee Who hast appeared in the flesh for baptism, O Invisible One; but the former turned back in fright, while the latter with trembling straightway touched Thee, the Incorruptible One. Verily, Thou art the Lamb of God, the ever-living Wellspring Who hath sanctified the streams, the sea and men. For the Trinity hath shone forth: from on high the Father calleth Thee His Son, and the Holy Spirit descendeth.

Ode IV

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, the prophet praiseth the restoration of mortal men; and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, he lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, Who hath broken the dominion of the mighty.

O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to repel utterly the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of men, and by Thy baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.

When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bore witness of Him to creation, and cried, plainly saying: “This is He Who was before me, yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to take away our hateful sin!”

That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the Word of God layeth siege to the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and, imprisoning him, delivereth creation.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst crush the heads of the dragons in the waters, and by the Spirit hast made me a man wholly new, O Word of God. Wherefore, I cry out to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Emulating Christ, Who bowed His head before the Forerunner, in thy submission and excellent humility, O father Theodosius, thou didst ascend the unshakable tower of virtue.

Serving the Virgin Mother of Christ God, thou didst receive the invincible grace of the Spirit, O father Theodosius, and hast cast down the invisible foe.

The glorious cave of the magi, which received thee, O Theodosius, showed thee to be a bearer of gifts unto Christ Who was baptized for our sake, offering Him faith, hope and love.

Strengthened by the sufferings of Christ the Master, O father Theodosius, thou didst endure torment with a loving conscience, struggling against the dark prince of this world.

*Theotokion:* In thy womb didst thou conceive the Lord without seed, and thou gavest birth unto Him who, incarnate, saveth the world by thine intercessions. Wherefore we cry unto thee: Rejoice, O Ever-virgin Mistress!

*Katavasia:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Ode V

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* Washed clean of the poison of the dark and vile enemy by the cleansing of the Spirit, we have set out upon a new path which leadeth to joy inaccessible, which only they attain whom God hath reconciled with Himself.

Beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable bonds in the darkness of sin, the Creator raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, in the midst of abundant waters, He cleanseth him of the ancient shame of Adam’s inclination toward sin.

With piety let us eagerly hasten to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of salvation: and, gazing upon the Word Who is come forth from the incorrupt Virgin, let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the infirmity of the world.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art a Mediator between God and man, O Christ God; for by Thee, O Master, are we led up out of the night of ignorance to Thy Father, the Source of light.

He Who renewed us in the waters having set fire to thy mind, which was subdued by asceticism, O most blessed Theodosius, thou didst wisely make thy body steadfast by spiritual ascents.

Ever setting the doctrine of death as a rule of thy life, and yearning to depart unto Him Who manifested Himself in the flesh for our sake, thou didst fashion a coffin for thyself, O Theodosius.

Thy glorious disciple Basil, O Theodosius, emulating the voluntary death of Christ, maketh ready a new grave, rejoicing.

*Theotokion:* Lo! O most pure Theotokos, thou didst have Christ God in thy womb, in manner past recounting, as Isaiah foretold; and thou gavest birth unto Him supernaturally, O Theotokos.

*Katavasia:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

Ode VI

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* With a most blessed voice the Father made manifest His Beloved Whom He had begotten from the womb. Verily, He saith, this, the splendid Son, of the same nature as Myself, hath come forth from the human race. He is My living Word, Who by My providence is become a man.

The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly of the sea monster, emerged again, making manifest beforehand to all our regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth mankind.

When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the all-pure Word, descending in ineffable manner in the form of a dove; and he commanded the multitudes to hasten to the Master.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

In Thy resurrection Thou hast given us incorruption, O Christ; wherefore, the glorious Basil, Thy favored one, is shown in death to be like one who is yet alive.

God is baptized, Who cleanseth the world and became a man like me for my sake. Him didst thou proclaim to be dual in nature, O blessed Theodosius.

The torrents of thy tears poured forth the sweetness of gladness in Christ God, Who transformed the tears of the myrrh-bearing women into joy, O Theodosius.

*Theotokion:* Vouchsafe unto me thy loving-kindness, O thou who gavest birth unto the most merciful Word, Who hath delivered men from corruption by His own blood.

*Katavasia:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

Planted in the courts of thy Lord, thou didst flourish most beauteously in thy venerable virtues, and didst increase in number thy children in the desert, watering them with the torrents of thy tears, O godly chief shepherd of the flock of God. Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O father Theodosius!

*Ikos:* Thou wast a man by nature, O father, yet wast shown to be a fellow citizen with the angels; for, living on earth like one of the incorporeal ones, O wise one, thou didst put aside every carnal thought. Wherefore, thou hearest from us: Rejoice, scion of a pious father; rejoice, offshoot of a devout mother! Rejoice, most comely citizen of the desert; rejoice, most radiant beacon for all the world! Rejoice, for from thy youth thou didst follow after Christ; rejoice, for thou didst cause carnal pleasures to wither away! Rejoice, mediator for the salvation of monastics; rejoice, model of consolation for the despondent! Rejoice, thou who didst deliver many from deception; rejoice, thou who bestowest torrents of miracles! Rejoice, thou who didst show care for the poor; rejoice, our intercessor and deliverer! Rejoice, O father Theodosius!

Ode VII

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* He Who cooled the lofty flame that encircled the pious youths in the furnace, hath burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters; and with the dew of the Spirit He washeth away all the unbearable gloom of sin.

The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and Thou burnest up the baneful malice concealed in its depths, which calleth men to fall with faltering step.

When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over on dry ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.

We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the flood upon the earth to destroy every living substance that Thou hadst made. And now, O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal men.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Blessed and most glorious art Thou, O Lord, Word divine, supremely exalted God, Who in Thy baptism united the stream which burneth up sin and the flame which bedeweth the human race.

Thou didst burn thyself as incense before Him Who made the Jordan a furnace, O venerable one; and accepting a heavenly flame as a true indication of God’s approbation, thou didst erect a temple for the salvation of men’s souls.

By thy tactics the children of Moses came to submission when grace manifested itself, O venerable one; for, having laid low the invisible foe, thy people have inherited the city of heaven, O all-lauded one.

Thou didst make of thyself a habitation for Him Who buried sin in the streams of the Jordan, O God-pleasing Theodosius, while also erecting a temple wherein to offer up unceasing hymnody; and thou didst make it a rule that praises be chanted in many languages.

Emulating the boldness of the youths, thou didst quench the tyrant’s threat of fire, wisely interceding for the Church of Christ, O father Theodosius, for which the Crucified willingly manifested Himself in the flesh.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone hast manifested an all-pure conception and an incorrupt birthgiving, while remaining a Virgin, O pure one; for thou didst conceive the God Who is above all things, yet Who became man for the salvation and deliverance of the faithful.

*Katavasia:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* Creation is seen to be fire, and those who before were in darkness to be children of the light. The prince of darkness alone groaneth. Let the inheritance of all the nations which before was accursed now fervently bless Him Who hath brought these things to pass!

Sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, the three godly children plainly prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious falsehood with the fire of dew.

Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former sins.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Once, in Babylon, the furnace prefigured the streams of the Jordan, which consumeth the adversary by divine baptism, yet bedeweth the faithful who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having eluded the carnal passions before thy departure, O Theodosius, drawing forth water from the bosom of the earth thou appearest to the youth who crieth: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

It was the most divine command of Christ, Who was baptized in the streams of the Jordan, that the blessing of thy hands should bring forth deep-lying water for a land parched by the burning sun; for a kernel of wheat was seedlessly nurtured to become an abundant crop.

Having entered the noetic darkness of the Light most divine, O Theodosius, and had thy heart inscribed by the finger of God like the tablets of the law, thou didst transmit the book of life, the teachings of piety, to thy disciples, O most blessed one.

When the woman who emulated the steadfast faith of the woman with an issue of blood touched thy hairshirt, O father, her affliction fled like darkness before the light which was in thee; for thou wast a chosen vessel of Christ Who hath manifested Himself.

*Triadicon:* Beholding Thee, God begotten of God, Christ Who hast ineffably appeared in the body, we have also come to know Thy Father and Thy Holy Spirit, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Without seed didst thou conceive Him Who is not separated from the Father, and Who as man and God made His abode within thy womb; and thou gavest birth unto Him. Wherefore, we know thee to be the salvation of us all.

*Katavasia:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of Theophany

*Irmos:* O most pure Bride, O blessed Mother! The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding. Having received most perfect salvation through thee, we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, offering a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift.

That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in wondrous manner; for as it bore fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, who gave birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.

O King Who is without beginning, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and make perfect the nature of man, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal life.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Thou didst proclaim the four Councils, equal in number to the Gospels of Christ, O divinely wise Theodosius, willingly accepting the blood of martyrdom in thy zeal; and thou wast shown to be a martyr for piety though thou didst not shed thy blood.

The judgment of the unjust ruler didst thou rightly refuse to accept; and he was deposed for banishing thee, deprived of his iniquitous soul for his blasphemous words, and given over to death, as an enemy of life, O venerable one.

Mindful of thy teachings, O Theodosius, we proclaim Christ to be dual in essence, knowing there to be two volitions, natural, active and autonomous, in God Who was baptized in the flesh.

O namesake of the good gift which cometh from the Father of lights, thou wast a physician of souls and bodies, abundant food and drink for those languishing in starvation and thirst, vesture for the naked and correction for the fallen.

Never cease to watch over thy flock, O venerable father, mindful of thy promise that, having thee as a mediator before Christ, we have been bound firmly to an immovable anchor of hope.

*Triadicon:* O ye faithful, in Orthodox manner with hymns let us glorify the threefold unity, the Trinity one in essence, the indivisible, all-divine nature of thrice radiant Light, the one incorrupt and never-waning Radiance which hath shone Its light upon us.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mother of God, thou art seen to be like the daybreak amid the night of life, resplendent with beams of virginity, revealing unto us the dawning of the noetic Sun of righteousness.

*Katavasia:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

We have been purified splendidly by Thy cleansing, O Christ, and now, with festive joy, we have been enriched by the commemoration of the honored Theodosius. Wherefore, the ranks of monastics are made glad. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of Theophany—

The Savior, Who is grace and truth, hath revealed Himself in the streams of the Jordan, and hath enlightened those who sleep in darkness and shadow; for He is come and hath appeared, the Light unapproachable.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Having made of thyself a house of exalted virtues, O Theodosius, thou wast vouchsafed to dwell in the divine house of the Theotokos, and to visit it; for thou didst love to gaze upon its godly splendor. And now thou beholdest the magnificence of the true tabernacle and the ineffable beauty which the Most High hath wrought, O venerable one, wherein He causeth those to dwell who most earnestly cry out to Him. Him do thou entreat, that He send down great mercy upon our souls.

Cleansing thyself with the pangs of asceticism, thou wast an emulator of thy Master, O most blessed one; for thou didst heal the affliction of her who touched the hem of thy garment, and didst nourish those who suffered starvation in the wilderness, pouring forth gifts from thine inexhaustible treasury, as the namesake of the gifts of God. And thou didst preach the Orthodox Faith, O venerable one, setting at naught the savagery of the tyrant, and praying to Christ Who bestoweth great mercy upon the world.

Having enkindled the flame of unwavering, burning and ardent love for God, from heaven thou didst receive effulgence, the divine will commanding thee to erect a most holy temple of virtue, where thy much-suffering body doth lie, most excellently honored by thy pure regulations, O most blessed one. Entreat Christ, that He send down great mercy upon our souls.

O father Theodosius, thou didst truly pass with rejoicing and gladness of soul to the wondrous tabernacle, even unto the house of God, and desiring to hear the voice of those who keep festival, and their beautiful and sweet hymnody, and to share in their ineffable spiritual delight and consolation therein, O blessed one, thou didst mortify thy flesh. This thou didst receive, adorned with divine righteousness, and thou entreatest Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone II—

The ladder of the virtues hath been mystically shown forth in an image on earth. Him let us praise as the adornment of ascetics; for, having truly fasted like the great Anthony and shown infinite humility, he tended his people piously and caused them to dwell in the holy fold, where the choir of angels abideth. And we cry out to him: Forget not even now thy flock, O most blessed Theodosius, but save us by thy supplications to the Lord, we pray!

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Today Christ hath come to the Jordan to be baptized; today John toucheth the head of the Master. The hosts of heaven are stricken with awe, beholding this most glorious mystery. The sea saw and fled; Jordan, seeing it, turned back. And we who have been illumined cry aloud: Glory to God Who hath manifested Himself, Who is seen on earth and hath enlightened the world!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode 6 of the canon of Theophany, and 4 from Ode 6 of the canon of the venerable one.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Corinthians, §176 \[II Cor. 4: 6-15\]

Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We, having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that He Who raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43 \[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

