Also On The 12th Day Of The Month Of January

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints Savva, First Archbishop & Teacher Of The Serbs

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

O Savva, thou wast a God-pleasing hierarch, a true pastor, an unshakable pillar, an immovable foundation of the Faith, a firm grounding in piety, an indestructible bulwark of the Church, the adornment of hierarchs and a wellspring of miracles; wherefore, we piously bless thee with hymns and celebrate thy most sacred memory. *Twice*

More radiant than the sun, thy luminous memorial hath shone forth upon thy faithful people, resplendent with divine effulgence, O most valiant and sacred father Savva, dispelling the darkness of the demons. Wherefore, we bless thee and with supplication hymn thee as a loving father and intercessor, an advocate for our souls.

The shrine of thy holy body emitteth sweet fragrance, O divinely inspired and holy hierarch, for Thou wast the indwelling and sweet savor of Christ, and driving away fœtid heresies by thy divinely inspired words, thou hast perfumed thy people. And now we entreat thee: Be thou mindful of all who commemorate thee with faith, in that thou hast acquired boldness before the Lord, O God-bearer.

Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone VIII—

Having tilled the hard ground of the hearts of thy people with thy words, therein thou didst produce for God the ever-flowering fruits of piety. With the purity of thy life thou didst adorn their minds, didst move them to zeal for the angelic life of monastics with thee, and didst urge them to prevail over transitory things, O divine harp, vigilant eye, pastor of pastors, O blessed and sacred father Savva. Accept us who praise thee, entreating Christ God in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Thy shelter is spiritual healing, O Virgin Theotokos; for, having recourse thereto, we are delivered from spiritual infirmities.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Having set thy mind as master over the passions and labored not in love of the flesh, thou didst live angelically, in purity, O Savva.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

As master of thy countrymen, to thy people thou wast given by Christ as an apostle and first hierarch, O father.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

By thy supplications unto Christ, O father Savva, do thou preserve thy reason-endowed flock from being dispersed by the adversary.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

From earliest childhood thou didst love the people who love thee, and didst labor for them until thy death; and even after death thou hast not forsaken those who have received thee whole and fragrant from thy strange journey, and who are gladdened, having thee as a royal ornament. For thou didst adorn them with the cathedra of thy primacy, and, having adorned them also with thy royalty, thou didst repose and didst make them steadfast by the Faith of the Trinity. And now they honor thy memory with the chanting of divine hymns, praying: O God-bearing and most sacred father Savva, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Deliver us from our needs, O Mother of Christ God, who gavest birth unto the Creator of all, that we all may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who alone art the intercession for our souls!

Troparion, in Tone III—

Thou wast a guide to the path which leadeth to Life, a primate and teacher; for, having arrived, O holy hierarch Savva, thou didst enlighten thy native land, and having regenerated it by the Holy Spirit, like an olive-tree in a noetic garden thou didst plant the most sacred children. Wherefore, honoring thee as one equally enthroned with the apostles and hierarchs, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, O Virgin Theotokos; for thy Son and our God, accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh He had received of thee, hath delivered us from corruption, in that He loveth mankind.

Litany and dismissal.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Having loved the Father Who is in heaven, and left thine earthly father, thou didst depart into the wilderness, O father; and having thence received the effulgence of the Holy Spirit through ascetic endeavor and prayer, arriving like the sun thou didst shine light upon thy people amid the darkness of ignorance, preaching Christ in two essences, Who for our sake shone forth from the Virgin. *Twice*

O divinely wise father Savva, we praise thee as is meet: the preacher equal to the apostles, equal in wisdom to the holy hierarchs, the fellow-struggler with the ascetics, the chosen pastor and compassionate bestower of mercy, the divinely flowing river of doctrines which hath drowned iniquitous heresies.

The Church of Serbia hath been adorned by the teaching of thy words, and, rejoicing now in Orthodoxy, with thy godly children it honoreth thy sacred memory with splendor, O sacred father Savva, equal in honor to the holy hierarchs, who standest forth with the angels, an advocate for our souls.

And these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside all…”—

Thou wast shown to be a God-bearer wholly sanctified, anointed by the Holy Spirit with holy and divine oil, and ever joining chorus, O venerable one, entering into the Holy of holies; and as an initiate of the sacred mysteries thou didst teach thy people the mysteries of salvation, as a truly chosen hierarch, O God-bearing father Savva, praying with boldness in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

From thy youth thy life shone with the radiance of the virtues, O most blessed and holy hierarch, and thou didst illumine thy people, truly dispelling the gloom of falsehood. And now thou hast made thine abode where the light is never-waning, where the choirs of the angels dwell. Standing with them, O venerable father Savva, remember us who celebrate thy memory, praying with boldness in behalf of our souls.

By faith and divine activity was thy mind adorned and clothed in splendor, O all-glorious and divinely wise one, having learned incorruption in a mortal and corruptible body; and having transcended the passions, thou didst attain the splendor of the incorporeal ones, O God-pleasing and holy hierarch Savva, thou radiant beacon of thy native land and bold intercessor in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Seeking glory from Christ the King of all, and forsaking thy ruler and father, thou didst flee to Mount Athos, where, exchanging the height of nobility for the low estate of a servant, thou didst lay waste to thy body with much labor, didst enlighten thy soul by prayer, and, remaining well in monasticism, didst live angelically in the wilderness. Thou didst preach in the world like the apostles, and by the pangs of asceticism and the travels of a wanderer, didst undergo the struggles of the martyrs. Who can describe the virtues whereby on earth thou didst gain heaven, O blessed father Savva, pastor and teacher? Yet as thou now standest before Christ God, pray that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

The shadow of the law passed away when grace arrived; for, as the bush wrapped in flame did not burn, so the Virgin gave birth and yet remained a Virgin. In place of the pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth. Instead of Moses, Christ is come, the Salvation of our souls.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; and the lips of wise men exude grace. The mouths of the wise teach wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them from death. When the righteous man dieth, his hope doth not perish. For the righteous son is born for life, and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. Light always shineth upon the righteous, and they find grace and glory from the Lord. The tongue of the wise knoweth what is good, and wisdom resteth in their heart. The Lord loveth holy hearts, and all are acceptable to Him who are blameless in their way. The wisdom of the Lord enlighteneth the face of him who hath understanding. For she overtaketh those who desire her, in making herself known unto them; and she is easily seen by those who love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and showeth herself favorably unto those in the ways. Evil never prevaileth over wisdom. For the sake of her I became a lover of her beauty. I loved her, and sought her out from my youth. I desired to make her my spouse, and I was a lover of her beauty; yea, the Master of all Himself loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a revealer of His works. Her labors are virtues, for she teacheth temperance and prudence, which are such things that men can have naught that is more profitable in their life. If a man desire much experience, she knoweth all things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of times and seasons. And she is for all a counsellor of good things. Moreover, by means of her I shall obtain immortality, for in the exercise of conference with her there is prudence. Wherefore, I prayed unto the Lord, and besought Him, and with my whole heart I said: “O God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast made all things with Thy word, and ordained man through Thy wisdom, that he have dominion over the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and righteousness! Give me wisdom, who sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. Send her out of the heavens, from Thy holy dwelling-place and from the throne of Thy glory, that, being present with me, she may labor with me, that I may know what is pleasing in Thy sight; and that she may lead me toward understanding, and preserve me in her glory. For all the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices are but uncertain.”

At Litia, these stichera idiomela—

*In Tone II:* O blessed Savva, thou didst acquire a venerable mind ever attentive unto God, free and motivated by thy will, unenslaved by the passions, a soul cleansed by asceticism, a heart merciful and serving God; and by humility thou didst adorn thy wise discourse, having in prudence cleaved wholly unto Christ from thy youth, O father. And thou wast given to thy people as their first hierarch, an apostle, as is meet, and thou didst beget them through the Gospel and didst enrich them with Orthodoxy. And now, standing before Christ God, pray that He deliver them from all misfortunes and save our souls.

*In Tone IV:* With thy discourses, as with the wellsprings of the Gospel, thou didst water the hearts of thy people, O holy hierarch, and by thy supplications thou didst cause the seed of piety to grow therein, and didst bring them to Christ as excellent fruit. And now, standing before Him with the choirs of the apostles and holy hierarchs, in thy prayers to Him remember us, that He preserve from all oppression us who celebrate thy memory in peace.

The great Church of Serbia, with the priests and princes of the people, and all the faithful, celebrating the goodly memorial of the pastor and teacher in gladness, crieth out: The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and He hath given us their holy relics! Come, ye faithful, let us rejoice in spirit, honoring both of the feasts of the saint—his repose and the translation of his holy relics—and let us crown ourselves with the praises thereof, as with flowers, saying: Rejoice, O bestower of mercy, blessed Symeon, thou heavenly man! Rejoice, abode of purity, sacred Savva, thou earthly angel! Rejoice, O holy twain, who like apostles taught your people and went before them on the path of life! And as ye stand with the angels before the Trinity, ask peace for our land and great mercy for our souls.

Glory…, in Tone V—

Having from thy youth avoided carnal love through desire for a purity akin to that of the apostles, and restrained thine untamed body with the reins of abstinence, thou didst bring it into goodly submission to thy soul, subjecting that which is baser to that which is higher by the power of thy mind; and having been counted worthy to become a vessel of the divine Spirit, thou wast first to adorn the cathedra of Serbia, and didst teach thy flock with godly wisdom. And standing now with boldness before Christ, O blessed Savva, thou divinely wise and holy hierarch, entreat Him earnestly, that He save the souls of those who hymn thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Rejoice, O portal of God! Rejoice, O pure Virgin, thou garden of paradise! Rejoice, O rampart and protection! Rejoice, O all-pure one! Rejoice, insuperable bulwark of the faithful! Rejoice, calm haven of those who have recourse unto thee, O pure one!

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II—

With what crowns of praise shall we adorn the most blessed Savva, the spiritual sun who shone forth from Christ, the noetic East, and hath illumined his people in the West, teaching them with divine understanding, and as a faithful servant caused them to grow in piety for his Master? Wherefore, Christ alone, Who loveth mankind and possesseth great mercy, hath adorned him fittingly with the ornaments of undying glory.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

With what spiritual hymns shall we praise the sacred Savva? By him have we come to understand the tablets of the Gospel, the new covenant of God; by him have we truly come to know the Orthodox Faith, to worship the one God in Trinity, and, though far away from and alien to the mysteries of God, we have become close to them and true performers thereof. By law and custom we have become Christian *people:* we crown kings and consecrate bishops; and, adorned with all the ways of goodness, we glorify Christ, Who hath great mercy.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

With what beauties of hymnody shall we bless thee, O right wondrous father Savva, who leadest all to an understanding of God by the splendor of thy life? Thou dost astonish us by thy wondrous miracles; for, as Elijah called down fire of old, by thy supplication thou didst cause hail to fall from the heavens, didst restore thy brother to life, didst raise up one paralyzed, didst cause the sea to give forth fish as a gift to thee, didst straighten the spine of a hunch-back, and didst perform many other wonders in God. Wherefore, we celebrate thy memory with love, magnifying Christ Who hath great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

In gladness let us who have been assembled by the grace of the divine Spirit bless Symeon, the scion of piety, from whom the most sacred Savva, the grapes of purity, sprang forth; and with hymns let us praise the mystic luminaries of the Church, the champions of the Trinity who cast down heresies, the adornment of priests, the cause of assembly for monks and of consolation for the poor, who were rich in every virtue; let us cry out in supplication to them as they stand now before Christ, adorned with crowns of apostleship as well as asceticism: Ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us that call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

At the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion, in Tone III—

Thou wast a guide to the path which leadeth to Life, a primate and teacher; for, having arrived, O holy hierarch Savva, thou didst enlighten thy native land, and having regenerated it by the Holy Spirit, like an olive-tree in a noetic garden thou didst plant thy most sacred children. Wherefore, honoring thee as one equally enthroned with the apostles and hierarchs, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, once:

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the guise of a dove confirmed the certainty of His words. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

Then this troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

Instructor in Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon for the whole world, divinely inspired adornment of hierarchs: O all-wise Savva, by thy doctrines thou hast illumined all. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, another troparion of the hierarch, in Tone III—

Thou wast a guide to the path which leadeth to Life, a primate and teacher; for, having arrived, O holy hierarch Savva, thou didst enlighten thy native land, and having regenerated it by the Holy Spirit, like an olive-tree in a noetic garden thou didst plant thy most sacred children. Wherefore, honoring thee as one equally enthroned with the apostles and hierarchs, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, O Virgin Theotokos; for thy Son and our God, accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh He had received of thee, hath delivered us from corruption, in that He loveth mankind.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Despising the falsehood of the world, riches and splendor, all the sordidness of visible beauty, and the great love of thy father, in poverty thou didst follow after Christ the Master, Who taught thee humility; and through ascetic endeavor and prayer thou didst inherit from Him true riches and splendor, an unshakable kingdom, and a goodly life forever. O father Savva, entreat Him now, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Let us hymn the portal of heaven, the all-holy mountain, the radiant cloud, the unconsumed bush, the noetic garden of paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of the whole world, for in her hath salvation been wrought for the world and the remission of the ancient offenses. Wherefore, let us cry aloud to her: Entreat thy Son, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who piously worship thy most holy birthgiving.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

In the doing of virtuous deeds and the splendor of thy discourses, thou didst shine forth as a great sun of the Church and didst illumine the assemblies of thy faithful people, destroying the darkness of the passions. O holy hierarch Savva, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…: another sessional hymn, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

As a pillar and ground of the Church of Christ, O all-wise father, thou didst preserve it unshaken by the temptations of the evil one; for thou didst destroy all the malevolence of heresy, and didst teach thy people to worship the consubstantial Trinity in one Godhead. Wherefore, having assembled, we honor thee, O divinely wise Savva.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, thou didst produce the most comely Cluster of grapes, Who poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation which doth gladden the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good things, we cry out to thee with the angel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father Savva, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A God be gracious unto us and bless us. \[Ps. 66: 2\]

B Cause Thy face to shine upon us, and have mercy on us. \[Ps. 66: 2\]

A Come unto Him, and be enlightened. \[Ps. 33: 6\]

B And your faces shall not be ashamed. \[Ps. 33: 6\]

A The rushings of the river make glad the city of God. \[Ps. 45: 5\]

B The voice of the Lord is upon the waters. \[Ps. 28: 3\]

A The Lord is upon the many waters. \[Ps. 28: 3\]

B The rivers have lifted up, O Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices. \[Ps. 92: 3\]

A At the voices of many waters. \[Ps. 92: 4\]

B Therefore will I remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem. \[Ps. 41: 7\]

A For in Thee is the fountain of life, in Thy light shall we see light. \[Ps. 41: 10\]

B The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back. \[Ps. 113: 3\]

A Thou didst establish the sea by Thy might. \[Ps. 73: 13\]

B Thou didst break the heads of the dragons in the water. \[Ps. 73: 13\]

A Thou hast cloven fountains and torrents. \[Ps. 73: 15\]

B The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid. \[Ps. 76: 17\]

A In the sea are Thy byways, and Thy paths in many waters. \[Ps. 76: 20\]

B How magnified are Thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast Thou made them all. \[Ps. 103: 24\]

Glory…, Now & ever… Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having adorned thy life with abstinence and confirmed thy wise discourse by thy life, by learning thou wast shown to be excellent in the virtues. And apostolically teaching thy people of Christ Jesus through the law and the prophets, thou didst beget them through the Gospel, and didst cause them to grow in the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, after thy repose thou hast received never-ending grace, and, lying in the grave, thou remainest intact. O father Savva, divinely blessed and holy hierarch, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer who knewest not man, as the receptacle of the Comforter, O most hymned one, haste thou to deliver me, who am the vile habitation of iniquity and am become in mind the plaything of the demons, from their machinations; and show me forth to be a splendid dwelling-place of the virtues, O unblemished light-bearer. Drive away the cloud of the passions, and, by thy supplications, vouchsafe that I may share in the never-waning light of the Most High.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* There will I make to spring forth a horn for David, I have prepared a lamp for My Christ.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Reading from the Gospel according to Matthew, §11 \[5:14-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you: Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

The grace of the Holy Spirit was poured forth in thy mouth, O father, and thou becamest a pastor of the Church of Christ, teaching thy people, the reason-endowed sheep, to believe in the Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Canon of Theophany, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the saint, with a total of eight troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon I of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “Grant me the understanding to praise Savva, O my God”, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

O Christ God, Thou Light from Light, Who wast begotten of the Father before time began and hast existed from the beginning with the Father and the Spirit: Driving away the gloom of my soul, illumine my mind, I pray, that I may be able to hymn the sacred Savva, Thy favored one.

Even though thou art a man by nature, O father, yet didst thou live on earth like an angel, taking the right-hand path from thy youth; and as a lover of chastity, O most sacred Savva, thou wast shown to be the honored habitation of the Holy Spirit.

Having loved the fear of God, the beginning of wisdom, and ever studied His commandments, thou becamest a tree planted by springs of the water of the Spirit, O father Savva; and, watered thereby, thou didst bring forth fruit for Christ.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, Eve, our first mother, heard: “In pain shalt thou give birth to children.” But thou, O Virgin, didst hear: “Rejoice, the Lord is with thee!” And with a joyful voice thou didst take away the grief of our first mother, O Bride of God.

Canon II of the saint, which describeth his miracles, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Having acquired boldness before Christ, O father, grant, I pray thee, a drop of understanding from the rich treasuries of the Spirit, unto me who praise thy life, that I may fittingly praise thee who art worthy of praise.

Irrigated with the waters of the knowledge of God, thou didst spring forth as a branch from a goodly root, and in thy life didst produce a sweet-smelling fruit from thy youth, O God-bearer, and dost gladden the hearts and souls of those who hymn thee.

O thine all-wise knowledge of God, whereby thou didst ensnare thy father for Christ, like a deer in a trap, O father! And, having made thine own soul like a deer, O God-bearer, burning with love of Him, thou didst hasten to Him, the Wellspring of immortality.

Moved by love of the beauties of heaven which pass understanding, and having fled the scant glory of earthly things, thou didst seek Christ with the fleetness of a deer, and from Him thou didst not fail to obtain that which thou didst desire, O father Savva.

Held fast to love of purity, thou didst not enslave the nobility of thy soul by carnal love; wherefore, accepting now crowns of purity, thou dwellest with the angels in the presence of Christ. Pray thou to Him, O father Savva, in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast revealed to Jacob as a ladder stretching from earth to the heavens, whereby God deigned to become a man, O blessed and all-pure one. O ineffable wonder, O incomprehensible vision, save those who have recourse unto thee!

*Katavasia:* The Lord Who is mighty in battles uncovered the bed of the deep and leadeth His own people across on dry land, but engulfing the enemy therein, for He hath been glorified.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having disdained things below as fit to be trampled underfoot, and put aside the love of thy parents, thou didst seek Christ with love in the desert; and, loving Him and seeking His infinite beauty, thou didst wound thy soul with the sword of His love.

Not content with any of the things on earth, and having asked thy parents for permission to hunt wild beasts, thou didst reach the wilderness, O father, where with great ascetic endeavor and ready vigilance in prayer and supplication, thou didst slay the passions, those soul-destroying beasts.

Having loved the humility of Christ, Who of His own will abased Himself for our sake even assuming the form of a servant, and having been exalted by Him, thou didst humble the prideful one, O sacred Savva, and through great asceticism wast counted worthy to become in the flesh a right spacious house of the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Among other women no virgin was known to be a mother, nor was any mother vouchsafed to remain a virgin after giving birth. Yet both things found their fulfillment in thee, O Virgin Mother of God. Wherefore, with gladness of spirit I chant: There is none more immaculate than thee, O Mistress!

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Ascending the mountain of the understanding of the virtues, thou didst bring thyself to the tangible Mount Athos like another Isaac, where thou didst noetically sacrifice thy heart as it were a lamb, a wholeburnt offering.

Adorning thy soul with tears as it were a lamp, and rising early unto Christ, by the stretching forth of thine arms in prayer thou didst slay thy body as it were Amalek, and didst ascend the mountain of dispassion.

Pierced by the love of dispassion, thou didst cause the uprisings of the flesh to melt away; and having illumined thy soul with divine effulgence, O father Savva, pray that we also be given the noetic Light.

Having caused the flower of thy youth to wither away through hunger and mortified thy bodily members by asceticism, thou didst reject the body through fasting, assisted by vigils and supplications, O Savva, and through love of the Lord thou didst reach the summit of the virtues.

Exalted in nobility, excellent in goodness of soul, thou wast marvelous in the wisdom of thine understanding, resplendent in purity like an all-comely flower, O father Savva, and thou wast adorned with radiant humility.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Mother of God, blessed and most immaculate, heal thou the wounds of my soul and drive away the passions of the flesh; free my mind from all harm and rescue me from every peril of the enemy, O Mistress.

*Katavasia:* The Lord Who giveth might unto kings and uplifteth the horn of His anointed, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. To Him, O ye faithful, let us cry out: For holy is our God!

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

God Who causeth all things to grow and increase and Who accepted the planting of Paul and the watering of Apollos, accepted also the planting of your faith and the watering of your teaching; and He hath multiplied the piety of your people through faith, causing it to grow by your supplications. And as faithful servants and reason-endowed husbandmen, ye have fittingly received from Him the reward for your labors. O venerable Symeon and sacred Savva, ye divinely wise fathers, pastors and teachers, entreat Christ, the Chief Pastor and Teacher, that He preserve your flock in peace and save our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

In thee, O thou who art full of grace, doth all creation rejoice—the assembly of the angels and the human race—O sanctified temple and noetic garden of paradise, thou boast of virgins, from whom God, Who is our God from before time began, was incarnate and became a babe; for He fashioned thy womb into a throne, and thine inner parts He made more spacious than the heavens. In thee doth all creation rejoice, O thou who art full of grace. Glory be to thee!

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

Emulating the life of the angels, and having left behind thy sovereign father, thou didst reach Mount Athos, from whence thou didst hasten to Christ, the noetic East, through ascetic endeavor and supplication, and from Him didst shine forth like the sun upon the lands of the West.

Having plumbed the sea of life with love of knowledge, and come to know the depths of vanity, thou didst cast away riches as though they were filth; and having chosen the words of Christ, thou didst hide them in the vessel of thy heart, and didst desire to cherish them there as precious things.

Going about unshod about the mountains to visit those who lived a solitary life, and fed by them as with warm loaves of bread, in their teachings thou didst receive the fervent supplications of all of them to Christ, and didst appoint ascents in thy heart.

In the Spirit thou didst beget him who begat thee in the flesh, urging him to forsake his dominion, consort and children; and as Abraham left his native country for a foreign land, O father, so did he come to thee and become a dweller in the wilderness and a fellow ascetic.

*Theotokion:* The tabernacle truly bore witness concerning thee in diverse images, for thou didst manifestly show forth the One of the Trinity Who became incarnate of thee immutably and hath restored the world, O all-pure Mother of God and Mistress.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having distributed many pieces of gold together, and having both exchanged corruptible things for incorruptible, like wise stewards ye now rejoice having received them. By your supplications to Christ save those who hymn you.

Thou didst call thy father as a man, but didst send him forth unto Christ as an angel; and his holy body, which had withered away through fasting, thou didst cause to pour forth a stream of myrrh, unto the uttermost assurance of the petition of thy heart.

The vain-minded Goth, despising thy fraternal life, fear of God and monastic vows, tried to oppress thy homeland; and, unable to dissuade him from such an intent, thou didst give him over to the judgment of God.

The blasphemous one who thought only of himself, and who, like that mindless one, refused to accept thy wise counsel, incurred the retribution of God; for the sword which he had sharpened to use against thy flock, O father, was thrust eternally into his own heart by an angel.

Illumined by the grace of Thy Cross, O Master, the holy father and son, the divinely wise Symeon and Savva, led the land of their own people to Thee by faith. By their supplications save from the assault of the heathen those who chant: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who art full of loving-kindness!

*Theotokion:* Having appeared like a new Moses, like him thou didst erect a tabernacle in the wilderness, an enclosed garden on the Holy Mountain, which thou didst cause to flourish through the sweat of thy labors, and didst dedicate it to the Mother of God. With her do thou preserve it by thy supplications to the Lord.

*Katavasia:* “He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly willed with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

He Who knoweth all things beforehand, seeing the zeal of thine understanding, made thee the first pastor for His people in the West, to whom thou didst preach Christ the incarnate Word, the noetic East, Who is equal to the Father and equally enthroned with the Holy Spirit.

Truly emulating the ways of Job of Uz, O father, thou didst keep thy house open and, opening the door of thy tongue as salvation sweeter than honey for the starving, thou didst fill their souls with the angelic food of thy words.

Following the divine laws, thou wast shown to be giver of laws, a right acceptable hierarch, a most excellent rule, a guide for the lost, and a most radiant beacon illumining thy homeland, O divinely wise Savva.

*Theotokion:* Guide aright my mind, which is foundering in the deep of tribulations and sinketh under the assault of corrupting passions, O Mistress; and save me who flee to thee, O pure Theotokos, for I know none other help than thee.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Emulating the compassion of thy Master, O father, as a disciple of the Lord thou didst bring the paralytic into the church; and having applied healing to him through supplication of Christ and tears, thou didst raise him up, whole, from the ground.

During his lifetime thou wast obedient to thine elderly father, and when he reposed, in the grave he hearkened unto thee alone; for his myrrh, requested by many but not received, O father, did he pour forth in abundance upon his people when thy letter arrived.

Thou wast shown to be another Elijah, for thou didst call down hail from the sky by thy prayer, as he did fire; and therewith thou didst astonish the king with amazement, O father, working this wonder for the glory of God and against the adversaries, Christ our God helping thee in all things.

The king of Hungary, the enemy of thy homeland, moved against it, but his savagery was transformed to meekness by thy words: he marvelled at thy holiness and returned to his own country pacified. And saluting the stones of his city, he said: Wondrous is God in His saints!

Ye were shown to be the invincible foundation of the Church, corner-stones, having as confirmation in your hearts Christ Who hath cast down the mighty fastness of deception. By your prayers preserve it unconquered, O sacred Savva and God-bearing Symeon.

*Theotokion:* Desiring entry unto Christ God, and seeking out thee who goest on before us, in that thou art the heavenly temple of God, O Mother of God, thy favored ones erected in their land a temple to thine entry, wherein do thou never cease to grant aid to those who glorify thee.

*Katavasia:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to annul the condemnation of Adam, the first-created. And since, as God, He doth not require cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan, therein slaying enmity, and granteth the peace which passeth all understanding.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

The land of thy people, once sunk in the gloom of heresy, now shineth with the light of Orthodoxy, having cast off its ancient delusion, becoming the New Israel, the people of God, guided by thee to the true law, O God-bearer.

An apostle sent by Christ, teaching the words of the Gospel, thou hast enlightened those in the night of ignorance; and working healings and great wonders, and astonishing all therewith, thou didst draw the fullness of thy people to Him through faith.

Seeking that which is greater, desiring that which is higher, thou didst journey to Jerusalem, Egypt and Sinai; and, going about the deserts in those places, and giving generously to the ascetics thou didst meet, thou didst enrich thy homeland with their prayers, O Savva.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the Creator, the hypostatic Word, O all-pure Virgin Mother and Mistress, thou didst restore those who before had become subject to aging through the grievous tasting of the tree and had fallen headlong.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst first make of thy heart an altar for the all-radiant Trinity, and didst raise up in thy homeland a temple to God the Savior, O father, wherein thou wast counted worthy by Christ to become a primate equal to the apostles, and didst pour forth upon thy people the word of life.

Hearing that thy brother had died, by thy boldness before Christ thou didst command an angel to restore to him his soul, and, arriving, thou didst find him alive again. O the faith! O the boldness! Thou who art earthly didst command one who is heavenly! O the truly awesome miracle!

Having stilled the noetic sea of the passions by ascetic endeavor, calling forth an abyss of mercy, thou didst likewise still the savagely raging material sea at thy word, didst save the ship from foundering and lead those therein to the Faith.

Having acquired Jesus Christ as Creator and Lord of all, Whom all things fear and before Whom they tremble, and bearing Christ in thy heart, having Christ speaking within thee, by His power thou didst rebuke the sea and winds, O father; and all things submitted to thee as to His excellent disciple.

*Triadicon:* O all-unoriginate Essence, Unity in three Hypostases, Father, Son and all-holy Spirit, Light and divinely originating Life: accept Thy favored ones as advocates for us, save Thy Churches which believe on Thee, and vouchsafe that we may glorify Thy dominion in peace.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to behold thy Son and God, the glory of the heavenly kingdom, O Theotokos, the venerable Savva and Symeon, having forsaken the glory of an earthly kingdom and taken His Cross upon their shoulders, followed in His life-bearing and divine steps.

*Katavasia:* In the wilderness the Forerunner, the voice of the Word, the lampstand of the Light, the morning-star of the Sun, crieth out to all the people: “Repent and cleanse yourselves beforehand! For, lo! Christ standeth before you, delivering the world from corruption!”

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

The Church of thy people doth glorify thee as a great primate and companion of the apostles, O venerable one. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, by thy supplications save us from all misfortunes, that we may cry to thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise father Savva!

*Ikos:* By thy life thou wast shown to be an angel on the earth, O father; for, though a man by nature, thou didst emulate the purity of the incorporeal ones. Wherefore, thou fillest us with awe, so that we cry out to thee such praises as these: Rejoice, O offspring of a pious father and child of a devout mother; rejoice, O God-given one, who in thy prayers didst from childhood follow Him Who bestowed thee! Rejoice, O radiant scion of fasting, right fragrant in purity; rejoice, O pillar of chastity beneath which every passion is crushed! Rejoice, thou who, exalted in humility, didst cast down the pridefulness of the demons; rejoice, beacon of great radiance, who leddest thy people to Christ! Rejoice, exaltation of churches and consecration of hierarchs; rejoice, feeder of orphans and compassionate giver to the poor! Rejoice, thou who wast equally enthroned with the apostles through thy teaching of the Gospel; rejoice, fellow athlete with the martyrs in the rigors of thy journeys! Rejoice, worker of marvelous miracles and awesome wonders in God; rejoice, boast of thy homeland! Save those who chant to thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise father Savva!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Beholding the God-pleasing correction of thy life, He Who as God of all knoweth all things before they happen, chose thee, joining thee to the apostolic choir of holy hierarchs, O God-bearer, and He illumined thy heart with grace; and thou didst enlighten thy people to cry unto Him: Blessed and all-glorious is God!

Having noetically illumined thy people with the rays of the words of the Gospel, thou didst lead them from that which is unworthy to that which is worthy, and their hearts, which had grown dry through wrong belief, thou didst cultivate and make fruitful through faith in God, O father Savva.

Thou wast merciful and meek, holy and guileless, calm and persuasive, like Paul who, praising Christ, said: Such a high priest hath befitted us. Him do thou entreat, O hierarch Savva, that He preserve thy flock in peace.

*Theotokion:* The laws of nature are restored in thee; for in manner transcending nature, O pure Virgin, thou didst all-gloriously give birth to Emmanuel, the unapproachable God, for the regeneration of us the faithful.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Overcome by love of Christ Who for our sake willingly walked the earth in the flesh, O father, and voluntarily forsaking the eminence of an earthly throne, like the sun thou didst make the transit of the earth, to the East and the West and over the depths of the sea.

Going about foreign lands as a disciple of Christ and a leader ordained by Him, and being accepted and loved by them, O father, thou didst cause them to marvel and didst bring them gifts, O father; for, within, thou wast all love, meekness and guilelessness.

He Who created the deeps by His command, acknowledging thee to be His disciple, acknowledging thee as His disciple, O father, ministered unto thee in thy pain, and taking up a great fish on a wave, as with His hands, while thou didst lie in the ship He placed it in thy hands.

They who sailed the deep with thee in a ship, beholding the sea submitting to thee and rendering up its gifts, were seized with awe, O father; and, taught the knowledge of God by that which is inanimate, in compunction they paid homage to thy holiness.

Fulfilling the desire of thy heart, for the sake of which thou didst journey upon the earth, God received thy spirit in a foreign city; and thou didst amaze them with the miracles thou didst perform during thy life, and after death with the dust of thy coffin and thy sepulchre.

*Theotokion:* The council of the venerable, following the steps of Him Who ineffably shone forth from thy womb, O Virgin Mother, hath been united to the choirs of heaven by thine ineffable Offspring. With them we pray: Ask thou remission of sins for us who honor thee.

*Katavasia:* The moist whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved the pious youths who were together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed amid the flame, they chanted with thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The venerable children, resplendent in soul and shining more brightly than now in the midst of the flame, were not consumed; for, summoning to them all things together, as many as were in creation, for divine hymnody, with joy they chanted: Hymn the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

By the grace of the Holy Spirit, Who resteth in the saints, O holy hierarch Savva, to thy people thou didst proclaim the Son Who is equally without beginning and equally enthroned with the Father, Who became a man, and wrought salvation for those who chant: O all ye works, hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Having finished the race well, thou didst pass over to thy desired end, rejoicing; wherefore, thy Church, celebrating thy luminous memory, O father, summoneth the venerable pastors and teachers who, illumined, chant: O all ye works, hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

When the Ishmaelites, the infidel children of Hagar, assail thy flock, O holy hierarch, rout them by thy supplications, in that thou hast acquired great boldness before Christ, that, celebrating thy sacred memory in peace, we may chant with joy: O all ye works, hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* He Who issued forth from thee without wedlock, O Virgin, endured torture, crucifixion and burial for our sake; and the venerable ones, emulating His sufferings, O pure one, followed Him through the torment of asceticism, bearing their cross.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

From its bosom the earth surrendered thee sanctified, whole and intact, astonishing the inhabitants of the city with sweet fragrance and miracles, and with the dust of thy tomb; and they cry out with the prophet: The righteous live for evermore!

The dust which surrounded thy suffering body hath been shown to be more precious than sapphires, O father; for it is curative and wonder-working, and is fittingly held to be more precious than gold by the faithful who chant: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints!

In a dream thou didst urge the pious kings, who held thy holy and precious body as a sacred thing and a blessing, to permit thy children, the hierarchs and priests, to bear it away as a priceless treasure.

Vladislav, the Christ-loving sovereign, going before thy holy body as David of old did before the ark, rejoiced, chanting: “My soul doth magnify the Lord, for He hath given me a father and teacher!”; and, rejoicing, he enshrined it in his own church.

As ye stand now before the throne of your Master and are illumined with beams of light therefrom, O God-bearing Symeon and divinely wise Savva, by your supplications deliver us from sinful passions, from the incursion of the heathen, and from divers evil circumstances, O saints.

*Theotokion:* The Master, Who is upborne on the shoulders of the dread cherubim as upon a throne of fire, made His abode within thy womb, O pure one, and hath deified human nature by assuming the flesh. By thy supplications to Him save those who hymn thee as His Mother.

*Katavasia:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth an all-glorious mystery, for the Jordan would receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator, Who is baptized in the flesh. Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Thou wast truly shown to be adorned with virtuous works, O father, and thy luminous memorial hath been adorned, enlightening us with rays of grace. By thy prayers to Christ may we be delivered from misfortunes and perils, we pray thereon.

Thy native land, which reared thee for Christ, rejoiceth, and the Church of God the Savior is made radiant, having thee whole and sweetly fragrant within it; and it joyfully celebrateth thy memory today. Bestowing a reward upon it, O holy hierarch, deliver it from all oppression.

Hearken to the cry of entreaty and the hymns of thy people, O hierarch of Christ, and attend to their faith and love; and as a lover of thy homeland, O father, oppose those who fight against us with wrath, and grant thy protection from on high to those who praise thee.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, thou hast healed the broken state and ancient suffering of mortals, having given birth to Christ the King Who bore our infirmities in the flesh. Wherefore, all of us, the generation of men, magnify thee, blessing thee as the Virgin Mistress and Bride of God.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

In life and even after death thou wast shown to be great in patience and returning good amid evil, O father; for the hunchback who, limping, fell flat upon thy tomb, thou didst cure instead of seeking retribution upon him; and, walking aright within the church, he magnified the Lord.

Your most excellent love for Christ hath now been revealed through the grace given you, O Symeon and Savva: your relics are fragrant and pour forth myrrh, and your memory is glorious and honored in holiness; and persuaded thereby, we say: The memory of the righteous is celebrated with hymns of praise!

Now let us speak of those visible ones who love God, who desire to enter in where the angels are, and the things fittingly prepared for them, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, as Paul declareth. And who is able to describe them?

Beholding the divine effulgence of the angels and the choirs of all the saints, O sacred Savva and God-bearing Symeon, with them entreat ye Him Who loveth mankind, that He grant correction of life and remission of sins to those who praise your memory with faith.

Let us offer words of praise in common unto both: for both were of one soul in this life, both were fellow ascetics in the wilderness, both received good things which pass understanding, and both now stand before the Trinity. Receiving them, O fathers, by your supplications save those who hymn you.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress who above all hast boldness, entreat thy Son in behalf of the whole world. Be not mindful of our countless stumblings, but protect the people who cry out to thee with a voice of compunction: O pure Theotokos, save those who magnify thee as is meet!

*Katavasia:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee fittingly; and even a heavenly intelligence cannot think how to hymn thee, O Theotokos. Yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our divine love; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

Exapostilarion—

O holy hierarch, we know thee to be a beacon of great radiance, a child of prayer, the offspring of the wilderness, a dwelling-place of purity, the fellow ascetic of monks, the feeder of the poor, the splendor of hierarchs. Wherefore, O father, we, the faithful, hymn thee.

Glory…: Another exapostilarion, to both saints—

O Savva and Symeon, ye luminous rays who shone forth from Christ the noetic Sun of the East and who with the splendor of your words and the manifestation of the virtues have illumined the benighted land of your own people in the West: Cease not now in your supplications to the Lord, that He preserve in peace those who honor your memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most pure Queen who gavest birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the transcendent Word, the Physician of all: Heal thou the sores and wounds of our souls, and preserve us untouched by any assault, for we ever pray to thee, O helper of the world.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O sacred father Savva, who wast reared well in abstinence, thou didst grow to the all-glorious stature of the virtues, gazing forth upon the mystic beauties of Christ. And having illumined thy mind with His splendors, thou didst enlighten thy people, and didst drive heresies from the Church of Christ. Wherefore, having acquired thee as a luminary, we praise thine all-radiant memory, blessing thee with sanctity. *Twice*

Having increased the talant entrusted to thee, thou wast found worthy of the joy of thy Lord. And thou now standest with the choirs of holy hierarchs and fasters, adorned with hierarchal vesture and the crown of asceticism, O all-blessed one, shining in spirit with the grace of divine effulgence and with noetic radiance. Wherefore, by thy supplications illumine those who celebrate thy radiant and holy memory, O sacred father Savva.

Having received thy precious relics, O blessed Savva, we honor thee with faith and love; for thou wast shown to be the instrument of the Holy Spirit, proclaiming aloud the ineffable mystery of salvation with thy divine teachings, and announcing to us the incarnation of the Word Whom we have come to know in greater purity through thee, O father. Before Him do we now set thee forth as intercessor, that we may be preserved in thy traditions.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Like the sun hath the memorial of the holy hierarch of Christ shone forth, noetically illumining the hearts of the faithful; and, celebrating it today with splendor, we cry out to him in supplication: Rejoice, O might of chastity, who didst preserve the state of thy soul in freedom and armed thyself with the shield of abstinence! Rejoice, O primate and teacher of thy Christian people! Rejoice, adornment of the Church, ornament of hierarchs and boast of monks! O all-sacred Savva, most blessed father, unceasingly entreat Christ God, that He send peace upon the whole world, that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast put forth for us the Fruit of life. Entreat Him, O Mistress, with the holy apostles, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode VII of Canon I of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of Canon I of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews §318 \[7:26-8:2\]

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the *people:* for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to John §36 \[10:9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

