The 12th Day Of The Month Of January

Afterfeast Of The Holy Theophany

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyr Tatiana

For this Day We Provide also the Service for St. Savva of Serbia

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal…”—

O sinless Lord, even though Thou didst deign to be baptized in the flesh, desiring to free the world from sin, yet do we glorify Thee, knowing Thee to be God; for, having been baptized, Thou hast delivered our souls from bondage.

When Thou didst arrive, incarnate, at the streams of the Jordan, O Lord, to sanctify the water by Thy glorious baptism, Thou wast pleased to bow Thy head before John, and to be baptized by a servant, that Thou mightest save our souls.

Desiring to save from delusion the world which Thou hadst created, O Lord, Thou wast well pleased to become incarnate of the Virgin who knew not wedlock, and hast delivered Adam from corruption, in that Thou lovest mankind; and, having been baptized, Thou hast given enlightenment to our souls.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When, richly illumined by the light of the Spirit, thou didst spurn riches, loving only those of heaven, thou wast manifestly invested with the might of the martyrs, and didst set thyself apart for boundless pangs. Wherefore, having cast down the enemy, thou hast plaited a wreath of victory, O all-glorious athlete and martyr.

When thou didst quench the stench of the flesh and the flame of sin with the dew of the divine Spirit Who worked within thee, O honored one, thou didst tame the wild beasts in the midst of the arena, giving thy body manfully over to wounding. Wherefore, having cast down the enemy, thou hast plaited a wreath of victory, O Tatiana, blessed of God.

Neither sword, nor fire, nor wounds, nor tribulations, nor starvation, nor any aspect of thy torture, could dull the ardor thou didst cherish for the Lord; for, seeking Him with a heart aflame, thou didst spurn all things visible, O martyr, and in the midst of the divine bridal-chamber hast made thine abode, becoming the bride of the King of all.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone V—

Beholding Thee, the Creator, naked in the waters, asking for baptism, all human nature was moved to fear and stricken with awe; and the Forerunner was seized with trembling, not daring to approach Thee. The sea fled and the streams of the Jordan turned back; the mountains, looking on, leapt up, and the angelic hosts marvelled, saying: “O the wonder! The Savior hath stripped Himself naked, desiring to clothe men in salvation and restoration!”

Aposticha stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “O ye hosts of angels, go forth…”—

Let us now cry out to the Lord in prophecy: Thou hast appeared unto us, O our Savior and Creator, and hast crushed the mouths of the serpents in the Jordan, in that Thou art compassionate, O Word, and hast illumined the blind with Thy light, O Christ! Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

By thy baptism, O Word, Thou hast given strength against the enemy to us who with love honor Thy dispensation, which Thou hast wrought of Thine own will, releasing men from the curse which they incurred in Eden. To Thee do we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, O Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

Let us who once of our own volition were clad in garments of skin through the fall of Adam, now drawn today to the streams of the Jordan by the baptism of the Lord, cry out to Him, theologizing with the angels: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

Glory…, Now & ever…, idiomelon, in the same tone—

O ye faithful, let us hymn the magnitude of God’s beneficence toward us; for, having become man because of our transgressions, He Who alone is pure and incorrupt is washed in the Jordan with our purification, sanctifying me and the waters, and crushing the heads of the serpents in the water. Wherefore, with gladness let us draw forth water, O brethren; for the grace of the Spirit is invisibly given by Christ God, the Savior of our souls, unto those who draw forth with faith.

Troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest: for the voice of the Father bore witness unto Thee, calling Thee His beloved Son; and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the certainty of the word. O Christ God, Who hast appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Wherefore didst thou marvel, O River Jordan, seeing the Invisible One naked? “I beheld and trembled,” it said, “for how could I have desired not to be filled with awe of Him and withdraw?” The angels were filled with fear, beholding Him; heaven was affrighted, and the earth quaked; the sea, and all things visible and invisible, were troubled. Christ appeared in the Jordan, to sanctify the waters.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ pipes…”—

Christ is baptized, enlightening the world, and from on high the Father beareth witness, saying: “This is My Son, in Whom I am well pleased. Heed ye Him! This is He Who illumineth the universe with His loving-kindness, Who is baptized and saveth the human race, in that He is God!”

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Canon of the feast, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the martyr, with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* The Lord, mighty in battles, uncovered the bed of the deep and led His people across dry land, overwhelming the adversary in the sea, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He hath been glorified.

The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He hath been glorified.

He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.

Canon of the martyr, the composition of Ignatius, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Illumined by the splendors of martyrdom, O martyr, thou standest before thy pure Bridegroom, asking that those who praise thee be delivered from soul-corrupting transgressions.

Thou didst utterly spurn corruptible riches, O martyr, possessing with zeal that which is incorrupt and abiding in the heavens; and, rejoicing, thou didst pass through the contest of martyrdom.

Thou didst fearlessly set thyself apart for wounding, pain and multifarious beatings, O martyr, for thou didst have the grace of the Savior aiding and strengthening thee.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden who gavest birth to the Wellspring of dispassion, heal me who have been wounded by the passions, and rescue me from everlasting fire, O thou who alone art full of the grace of God.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Lord, Who giveth might unto our kings and exalteth the horn of His anointed ones, is born of the Virgin and cometh to baptism. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud unto Him: There is none as holy as our God!

O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!

In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none as holy as our God!”

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

The threefold billows of torments which smote thee did not shake the tower of thy heart, for it was founded upon the rock of the love of Christ, O most lauded one. To Him thou didst cry aloud: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord!

He Who assumed human weakness gave thy weakness wings of power against the feeble serpent. Wherefore, O martyr, thou didst cast him down to the earth, crying out with faith: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord!

With the streams of thy blood thou didst cause the torrents of iniquity to dry up, O blessed one, and thou now enjoyest a torrent of sweetness and dwellest in never-waning light, crying: There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Thy conceiving and birthgiving are beyond description, for at the word of Him Who created time thou gavest birth to Him Who hath delivered the ends of the earth from irrationality, O Maiden who knewest not man. Him do thou ever beseech, that He save us.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Thou didst shine forth radiantly in thy suffering, O passion-bearer, adorned with thy blood, and like a beautiful turtle-dove thou hast soared aloft to the heavens, O Tatiana. Wherefore, pray thou ever for those who honor thee.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before…”\_

Having completed a twofold contest on earth, O martyr, thou wast vouchsafed to receive a twofold crown from the hand of thy Bridegroom; for thou didst fast, subduing the carnal passions, and, contending lawfully, thou didst cast down the enemy. Wherefore, by thine entreaties save us from perils.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone & melody—

Christ our God, Who clotheth Himself in light as with a garment, is clad in the streams of the Jordan, while the Father beareth witness from on high that He is equally enthroned with Him, and the Spirit of glory cometh down. He it is Who enlighteneth and sanctifieth us.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* He whom Thou didst call a Voice crying in the wilderness hath heard Thy voice, O Lord; for Thou didst thunder forth over many waters, bearing witness unto Thy Son. And having been wholly filled with the descending Spirit, he cried out: “Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

Bearing a beautiful state of soul with the magnificence of piety, and shining all-gloriously with the light of martyrdom, Tatiana maketh her abode with the pure Bridegroom.

The angels of heaven, who were sent by God to help thee, inflicted blindness upon the all-iniquitous ones who smote thy face with a rod; and they marvelled also at thine endurance.

Lawfully preaching Christ, thou didst triumph over the most iniquitous ones; and thou didst offer thyself to Him as an unblemished, right pleasing and most perfect sacrifice, crying out: Loving Thee, O Savior, I am slaughtered!

*Theotokion:* Guide me to the calm haven, O most holy Bride of God; for the tempest and tumult of sin cruelly assail me, and I am buffeted by the winds of the wicked demons who oppress me.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Jesus, the Author of life, cometh to lift the condemnation of Adam the first-created, and though as God He requireth no cleansing, He cleanseth the fallen one in the Jordan. And having slain enmity therein, He granteth peace which passeth all understanding.

When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for He standeth before you, granting peace.”

Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He most wisely doth separate the harvest of the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Emulating Thine honored and blessed suffering, O Christ, Bestower of life, she who cleaved unto Thee with dispassion suffereth eagerly, her members severed, crying: I know none other God than Thee!

Having mentally received the fear of God within thy womb, through steadfast suffering thou didst all-gloriously give birth to the spirit of saving confession and martyrdom, O thou who art valiant of mind, and didst put to shame the princes of the adversary.

Illumined by the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, thou shinest with radiant beams, shedding light upon the hearts of the faithful, dispelling the gloom of sin, O right wondrous martyr and passion-bearer of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O splendid cloud of the Sun, who illuminest me with radiance which dispelleth the gloom of my transgressions: Extend thy hand to me who have fallen into the mire of sin, and raise me up who lie therein, O thou who alone art the restoration of fallen Adam

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The voice of the Word, the candlestick of the Light, the morning star of the Sun, the Forerunner, crieth out to all the people in the wilderness: Repent, and be ye cleansed beforehand! For, lo! the Christ is at hand, delivering the world from corruption!

Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from deception.

With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

When the honored martyr acknowledged Thee Who wast stretched out upon the Tree, she deigned to be suspended aloft, her body lacerated for love of Thee, O Almighty.

The most savage of beasts stood in awe of thee, who suffered manfully in the arena like the protomartyr Thecla of old, whose zeal thou didst acquire, O ever-memorable one.

The angels of heaven, appearing before thee in the midst of the prison, illumined thee with light, taking away thy pain, and glorifying thee as a ewe-lamb of God.

*Theotokion:* The Creator chose thee, the beauty of Jacob, whom He loved, from among all generations, O most immaculate one, and He appeared, shining forth from thee.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV—

Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, and Thy light, O Lord, hath been signed upon us who hymn Thee with understanding. Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, the Light unapproachable.

*Ikos:* Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light unapproachable!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The dew-laden, whistling wind and the descent of the Angel of God preserved unharmed the pious youths who communed together in the fiery furnace. Wherefore, bedewed in the flame, they raised a hymn in thanksgiving: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as man, in the waters.

The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Right mightily didst thou patiently endure the excision of thy severed breasts, O invincible one; and with heavenly fire, O martyr, thou didst consume those who would not worship God, Whom all creation doth hymn, rendering glory.

Bearing the fire of divine love in thy heart, O immaculate one, and embodying the courage and strength of the youths of old, thou didst trample the flame underfoot and wast not afraid of the fire, thy fellow creature.

The savagery of the wild beasts became submissive to thee, and without suffering harm thou didst close the gaping mouths of the lions with the help of God Whom thou didst glorify, fulfilling His sufferings in thy flesh, O most lauded one.

*Theotokion:* In giving birth for us to the hypostatic Life Who hath manifestly destroyed death by death, O pure one, thou hast mortified the carnal passions of us who honor thee with faith as the most glorious Theotokos.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Babylonian furnace which poured forth dew showed forth a most glorious mystery: how the Jordan was to receive the immaterial Fire in its streams and embrace the Creator baptized in the flesh. Him do the peoples bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

“Put aside all fear,” the Deliverer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages!”

The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and exalt supremely for all ages.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Made beautiful by the virtues, thou wast adorned with the beauties of martyrdom, and, resplendent in the beauty of immortality, thou didst wed thyself to the Bridegroom Who is more comely than all men, O divinely wise Tatiana.

In prison thou didst render glory with the incorporeal ministers, shining with the glory of divine radiance, and remaining unapproachable to all who are stuck fast in the darkness of falsehood.

The fracturing of thy limbs broke asunder the snares of the foe, and the shedding of thy blood dried up the cruel torrents of ungodliness, O honored one who hast been shown to be an abyss of wonders for us.

*Theotokion:* Save and take pity upon us, O thou who in manner past description gavest birth for us to God, the compassionate Savior, removing the burning heat of fiery thoughts and passions by thy supplications, O all-glorious and pure one.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thee as is meet, and even an intelligence from above the world is in doubt how to hymn thee, O Theotokos; yet, as thou art good, accept our faith, for thou knowest our longing inspired by God; for thou art the intercessor of Christians, and we magnify thee.

O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”

Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”

By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning light of the Trinity.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

After many tortures the cruel judge condemned thee to be beheaded, and at thine ascent the heavenly ranks clapped their hands. With His omnipotent right hand, O martyr, Christ hath crowned thee, who suffered lawfully.

Having most manifestly drawn nigh unto God, thou didst join with the most splendid assemblies of martyrs; and thou beholdest what the angels see, and as a virgin thou dost dwell in the bridal-chamber of thy Bridegroom, O honored one, praying that those who honor thee with love may be saved.

O Tatiana, we proclaim thee the sealed wellspring, the garden enclosed, the precious and sacred offering, the incorrupt bride of Christ, the victim and sacrifice, the ewe-lamb and goodly turtle-dove of the Master of all.

*Theotokion:* Moved by the voices of those who fervently entreat thee, O Mistress, only refuge of the faithful, save, take pity and preserve from harm and every invasion of the heathen, those who ever magnify thee with faith and love.

Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us…”—

The Savior appeared, grace and truth, in the streams of the Jordan, and He illumined those sleeping in darkness and shadow, for He, the immutable Light, hath come and appeared.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “O ye angelic hosts, go forth…”—

As Thou art light, the Effulgence of the Light, O my Jesus, Thou hast illumined with Thine ineffable radiance us who of old were blinded in Eden by the serpent; and beholding by Thy light the light in the Jordan, we all chant with faith: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.

O Forerunner, thou initiate and performer of awesome mysteries, who thyself beheldest joy and the Spirit: Entreat the Word Who was baptized by thee, as was His good pleasure, that He ever grant us deliverance from offenses. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

*Stichos:* What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, O Jordan, that thou didst turn back?

Let us lift up our hearts in understanding, O ye faithful! And let us run with haste to the streams of the Jordan, and behold the Creator baptized in the flesh by John the Forerunner; and theologizing with him, let us chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone & melody—

O the dispensation of God which passeth understanding! How doth the Creator stand before His creature and bow His head before him? For by His example He setteth a model of humility before us who have been illumined by Him. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 6 troparia from Ode VII of the festal canon.

