The 15th Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Fathers

Paul of Thebes & John the Hut-dweller

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable Paul, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

O thrice-blessed Paul, thou didst show thyself to the world as the beginning of the life of the heaven-scaling path of virtue; for well didst thou appoint spiritual ascents in thy soul, whereby thou didst achieve the apex of the virtues through abstinence and many pangs.

Furnishing thy mind with wings to fly to divine desire, O blessed one, thou didst ascend to the upper desert and didst draw nigh unto the darkness, wherein thou wast radiantly illumined by the understanding of God and wast anointed on the tablets of thy heart with the splendor of the virtues.

The desert blossomed with the beauteous flowers of thy virtues; for therein thou didst destroy the thorns of the passions, and didst plant the right glorious pangs of thy divine works. Wherefore, like a lily planted by God, thou dost now perfume us with the sweet fragrance of thy life.

And 3 stichera of the venerable John, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When at the behest of God thou didst flee the beauties of the world, rejoicing, O father, thou didst prefer the narrow and exceeding hard path of pain to that which is broad. Wherefore, clothed in the image of God, thou didst receive the care of souls, O divinely blessed one, for thine avoidance and denial of pleasures.

Wounded by the love of Christ, Whose ineffable poverty thou didst love, thou didst conceive of a strange life, a strange undertaking, O father, and as a homeless pauper at thy parents’ gate, thou didst endure affliction and abuse. Wherefore, thou wast filled with spiritual gifts and hast in the heavens inherited riches which cannot be taken away.

Bearing the sacred Gospel in thy hands, O father, thou becamest a fulfiller thereof. Spurning the possessions of thy parents, by tears and poverty thou didst perfect thy whole life, O venerable John. Wherefore, thou dost now delight in divine consolation and never-ending gladness, O all-blessed one.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Rejecting the world and all that is in the world, O venerable one, and taking up the Gospel, thou didst follow Christ evangelically; and living secretly in a hut, as in a garden of paradise, by thine utterly strict manner of life thou didst choke the serpent, the slayer of men. Wherefore, abiding in the heavens, O blessed John, beg thou great mercy for us.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb led, of His own will, as a man to the slaughter, she said, weeping: “Dost Thou now hasten to leave me childless, O Christ, who gave Thee birth? What is this that Thou hast done, O Deliverer of all? Yet will I hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, beg thou peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this strange mystery which I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended in the flesh upon the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their entreaties direct our life in peace.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Venerable Paul, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

Assembling, O ye faithful, let us honor with hymns, as is meet, the God-bearing Paul, as the adornment of monastics.

Thou wast the first inhabitant of the desert, O glorious Paul, and through asceticism didst show thyself to be an heir to the kingdom of heaven.

Having cleansed thyself wholly through abstinence, O most blessed one, thou wast shown to be a habitation of God and a dweller with the angels.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Theotokos, we hymn thee who, in manner transcending nature, gavest birth to the transcendent and all-divine Word incarnate.

Canon of the Venerable John, the acrostic whereof is: “By thy supplications, O blessed one, show me to be freed from the passions”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Overwhelming power once laid low the whole army of Pharaoh in the deep, and the incarnate Word hath destroyed pernicious sin. All-glorious is the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Enriched by divine virtues, thou didst spurn earthly wealth and didst receive that of heaven. Wherefore, with grace enrich me who am poor in the understanding of God, O father, that I may hymn thine angelic life.

Having shouldered the good yoke of the Lord from thy youth, O blessed one, armed with the humility of Christ thou didst bring down the enemy in thine ascetic contests, whereby thou wast exalted to the heights of heaven, O John.

Having trod the narrow path with sorrows and tears, sighs and afflictions, O venerable one, thou didst attain unto a broad space, discovering a habitation which befitted thy pangs, O right wondrous father John.

*Theotokion:* Tempest-tossed by the cruel attacks of the passions and brought low by the assaults of sin, O maiden, with love I flee to thine ever-vigilant and invincible intercession. Take pity and save me, O all-hymned Ever-virgin.

Ode III

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* O Lord Who in the beginning established the heavens and founded the earth upon many waters, make me steadfast for the chanting of Thy glorification.

Looking toward God with the eye of thy soul, thou didst love Him, hating the things of earth and perfecting an angelic life.

With rays of the virtues thou didst manifestly dispel the darkness of the passions, receiving in thy heart the enlightenment of the Spirit.

Fed with heavenly bread as Elijah was fed of old by the raven, thou didst escape the noetic Jezebel, O father, fleeing to the protection of Christ.

*Theotokion:* The Creator and King of glory, having stained and dyed His royal robe with blood, mystically empurpled it, O Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* The desert, the barren Church of the nations, blossomed like a lily at Thine advent, O Lord; and therein hath my heart been established.

Thou didst offer thy prayers like fragrant incense to Him Who seeth all things,, O venerable one; and, perfumed thereby, He accepted them and enrolled thee in the choirs of fasters.

Thou wast shown to be a magnificent wonder, O venerable one, filling the hearts of the pious with awe; for thou didst endure poverty and abuse at thy parents’ gates.

Enduring all lawfully in prayers and fasting, O venerable one, thou didst clothe thyself in dispassion, humbling carnal-mindedness by the might of the divine Spirit.

*Theotokion:* The Pure One found thee to be like a myrrh-scented lily of the valley, O all-pure one, and He made His abode within thee, filling mankind with sweet fragrance.

Kontakion of the venerable Paul, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Assembling today, in hymns we praise thee, the never-waning luminary of the noetic Sun; for thou didst shine forth upon those in the darkness of ignorance, leading all to the divine heights, O venerable Paul, adornment of the Thebans, steadfast foundation of the fathers and the venerable.

Sessional hymn of the venerable Paul, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Hating the beauties of this world with all thy heart, and loving the one God with all thy soul, thou didst enter the desert, O Paul, as thy city of sojourn. And exercising thyself in vision alone, thou wast shown to live as an angel in the flesh. Wherefore, we honor thee.

Glory…: that of the venerable John, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

Forsaking corruptible wealth and fleeting glory, O blessed father, thou didst receive heavenly riches and truly everlasting glory. Wherefore, we bless thy holy repose and, celebrating thereon, we cry out to thee: Be thou mindful of us, O John, in that thou hast boldness before the Lord.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, thou didst sprout forth the most comely Cluster of grapes Who poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation which maketh glad the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, blessing thee ever as the cause of good things, with the angel we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!

Stavrotheotokion—

Thy pure Mother who knew not wedlock, O Christ, seeing Thee hanging, dead, upon the Cross, said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous and thankless council of the Jews repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son Who filled them with Thy gifts? I hymn Thy divine condescension!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* Mystically foreseeing Thee incarnate of the Virgin, O Word, the prophet cried out in song: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Planted in the house of God, thou didst put forth the goodly fruit of the virtues and by thy fasting didst cause the uprisings of the flesh to wither away.

With the fire of the love of God thou didst reduce to ashes the thorns of the passions, O father, and didst show thyself to be a dwelling-place of the Spirit.

With the rod of thy virtuous life thou didst drive away the passions away like wild beasts. Wherefore, thy death brought together the wild beasts for thy burial.

*Theotokion:* A mystic robe of purple was woven of thy pure blood for the God of all, O Theotokos; and, clad therein, He hath united us to God the Father.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a treasure concealed in a pauper’s rags, O divinely inspired one; for thou didst love the vesture of God, and, clad therein, thou hast entered the bridal-chamber on high.

Receiving the seed of heaven, in the furrow of thy heart, O divinely inspired one, thou didst produce the comely grain which feedeth to repletion the minds of those who with veneration honor thy memory.

Of thine own will thou didst confine thyself to a hut most close, as poor as Lazarus, O wondrous one. Wherefore, thou hast now found rest in the bosom of Abraham, O venerable father.

*Theotokion:* Direct the movements of my soul toward the divine commandments of Him Who shone forth from thy womb, O most immaculate one, delivering me from the storm of the temptations of life by thy mediation.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Living in hymnody and fasting, in prayers and vigils, O venerable one, thou didst make thine abode with God.

Thy life was most honorable in the Lord, O most blessed Paul, and thy burial most glorious.

Finishing the race of asceticism, O venerable, thou becamest a companion of the heavenly hosts.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, who wast a Virgin even after giving birth, O Theotokos, for for the world thou gavest birth in the flesh unto God the Word.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Thou becamest a stranger to the pleasures of this world and a stranger to thine own parents by thine own volition. And purifying thyself by abstinence, thou didst unite thyself to the Almighty, O father John, becoming poor in spirit.

Having enclosed thyself in a mean hut, thou didst make thyself a temple of the Holy Trinity, and didst endure, cleansing thy soul with divine teachings, ever looking toward the ineffable goodness of God, O father John.

Thou didst show thyself to be a fulfiller of the law of God, O divinely wise father, preferring naught to His love; for neither thy brethren, nor the love of thy parents, nor riches, nor dignity, nor the carnal pleasure weakened thee.

*Theotokion:* Thou givest birth incorruptibly to Emmanuel, the Master of all, O Virgin Mother, remaining a virgin even after giving birth. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He deliver from the temptations of the enemy those who flee to thy protection.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Stretching forth thy hands to God, O venerable one, thou didst offer Him thy soul, pleasing Him day and night.

The armies of heaven, the ranks of the prophets and the holy apostles glorified thy repose, O venerable father.

Flying before the tempest of the passions with the sail of extreme asceticism, O venerable one, thou didst make for the calm harbor of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O thou who alone gavest birth to the Word in the flesh, at the word of the archangel, deliver our souls, we pray, from the snares of the enemy.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst cast down the prideful serpent with the sword of humble-mindedness, O most blessed one; and, exalted in spirit, thou hast made thine abode in the mansions of everlasting life.

Thou wast full of the gifts of the Spirit and, as one knowledgeable, all-wise and greatly inclined toward God, thou didst subdue evil spirits.

Shining from the heights of dispassion, O father John, strengthened by God thou didst endure enclosure in a mean hut and the abuse directed at thee.

*Theotokion:* From thy womb, O pure one, thou gavest flesh to the Word Who is equally enthroned with the Father and, with Him, is the Creator. And He hath borne our whole nature, in His ineffable compassion.

Kontakion of the venerable John, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Loving the riches which cannot be stolen, O all-wise John, thou didst hate the riches of thy parents; and, holding the Gospel in thy hands, thou didst follow after Christ God, praying unceasingly for us all.

*Ikos:* Who is able to hymn thy labors and pangs, thy many works, thy glory and greatness as is meet? Yet by thy right acceptable prayers to God grant me now the grace of the Spirit, O most blessed one, that I may faithfully recount thy struggles which transcend nature, and may hymn thine endurance and firmness of resolve, which pass recounting, wherewith thou didst put the deceitful enemy to shame. Cease thou never to pray for us all.

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* O Lord God of our fathers, Who in the beginning founded the earth and established the heavens by Thy word: blessed art Thou forever!

Subjecting carnal-mindedness to the spirit, the venerable one cried out: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers!

Saved from the snares of the enemy, O venerable one, thou didst cry out in joy: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers!

Having trampled all the flame of the passions underfoot by fasting, the venerable one cried out: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God of our fathers, Who madest the Virgin heaven, shining forth from her like the sun.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Thou didst choose the narrow path over that which is broad, O right glorious one, and, rejoicing, thou didst endure abuse before the gates of thy parents, afflicted with many pangs, O divinely blessed one.

Thou didst adorn thyself with most beautiful ascents, mortifying carnal-mindedness, O wise one. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the heavens, ever numbered among the choirs of the honored fathers, O right wondrous one.

Treading the paths which lead to divine rest, protected by divine grace, thou didst avoid the defiles of the demons, O blessed one; and thou didst cry out: Blessed art Thou and all-glorious!

*Theotokion:* We hymn thy birthgiving, O blessed one, whereby we have been delivered from the ancient condemnation; and thee alone do we bless, O blessed of God, whom He Who is blessed and all-glorious hath loved.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* The unoriginate King of glory, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Fasting in the desert, thou didst emulate the divinely wise John the Forerunner; and with him thou hast been counted worthy to receive the life which is truly everlasting.

With the dew of abstinence thou didst extinguish the furnace of the passions, O our father, crying out with all piety: Ye people, exalt Christ supremely forever!

Thou didst truly make the desert a garden of paradise, excelling therein in every virtue. Wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed the delight of paradise.

*Theotokion:* As thou hast boldness before God, O most lauded Mary, Mother of God, entreat Him to deliver from tribulations those who hymn thee with faith.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

When thou didst wear rags, O John, thou didst weave for thyself a robe embroidered with the virtues; and clothed in the garb of a pauper, thou didst take on the guise of a beggar, enduring abuse at the gates of thy parents.

Blameless as another Job, thou didst suffer affliction at thy parents’ gates, enduring the mockery of their servants as he endured the dung-hill, O wise one; and thou wast prey to starvation and thirst. Wherefore, thou hast inherited the kingdom on high.

Thou didst follow the Gospel which thou didst hold in thy hands, O blessed one, and impoverish thyself, being sad of countenance all thy life. Thou wast meek and innocent, and art an heir to the kingdom on high.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, thou pourest forth an ever-flowing stream upon us who have recourse to thee; and drawing forth abundant grace therefrom, we hymn thy birthgiving, O pure one, and exalt it supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Venerable Paul

*Irmos:* With hymns we magnify thy birthgiving, O Virgin Mother who knewest not wedlock, who received the Invisible One Who assumed a divine appearance.

God revealed thee to Anthony like a hidden mystic treasure, O venerable one, unto our glory and joy.

Nailing thyself to the fear of God, O venerable father, and having finished thy life with an instruction on death, thou hast been counted worthy of life.

As thou hast acquired boldness before God, pray for those on earth who keep this thy memorial with faith, O blessed Paul.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who conceived and ineffably gavest birth to Christ, Who with the Father and the Holy Spirit is without beginning: pray that we be saved.

Canon of the Venerable John

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

“The Lord is my strength and my song,” thou didst cry. “In Him do I vanquish the prince of darkness; and I fear not his phantasmic illusions, pondering only the unapproachable beauty of God.”

Like rich soil thy heart received the heavenly seed in its noetic furrows, O venerable one, and hath borne fruit an hundredfold, feeding all the souls who with faith honor thee, O blessed of God.

The Lord hallowed thee from thy mother’s womb, O blessed one, and directed thy steps toward Him. Wherefore, thou hast been numbered among the venerable who lived piously, with whom thou enjoyest deification, O all-glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Thy womb became the dwelling-place of the Light, and thereby those who sit in darkness have seen the light. Wherefore, with unceasing voices we ever hymn and honor thee with love, O Mother of God, as the hope of our souls.

Exapostilarion of the venerable John: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Forsaking thine attachment to thy parents and their transitory wealth, thou didst take up thy cross and didst follow after Christ with all thy soul, O father John; and by fasting thou didst slay the passions and didst hasten to dispassion. And thou prayest for us, O God-bearer.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most hymned Maiden, thou gavest birth to Christ, the King of glory, the Angel of the Father’s great counsel, Whose Cross the venerable fasters took up, following Him. With them do thou unceasingly pray for us, O Theotokos.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee, O Paul our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; for, following thy steps, we have truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who didst labor for Christ and set at naught the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

“What is this sight which I see, which mine eyes behold, O Master? How is it that Thou Who sustainest all creation diest, uplifted upon the Tree, granting life unto all?” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she saw the God and man Who had shone forth from her ineffably, hanging on the Cross.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of Saint Paul, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of Saint John.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous things.

Epistle to the Galatians §213 \[Gal. 5:22-6:2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

Be it known that, following the leave-taking of the feast of the Theophany \(i.e., from January 15th\), until the leave-taking of the feast of the Meeting of the Lord, on Sundays and the major feasts of saints, we chant as katavasia the irmoi of the canon of the Meeting.

