The 16th Day Of The Month Of January

The Veneration Of The Precious Chains Of The Holy Pre-Eminent Apostle Peter

At Vespers:

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs....”—

Bound as was Lord, and imprisoned in a dungeon, thou didst bind falsehood, O apostle. Wherefore, we honor thee lovingly, and with faith we kiss thy chains, whence drawing forth health of body and salvation of soul, we praise thee as is meet, O thou who hast beheld God, converser with the incorporeal ones. *Twice*

Those who are stuck fast in ignorance receive understanding through thee: the races of the gentiles, which in the beginning were widely scattered, were shown thine image let down from on high as a vessel wherein was contained every living creature, O apostle. Wherefore, every generation glorifieth thee, worshipping the chains which thou didst most zealously bear for Christ. *Twice*

He Whom thou didst deny when He was condemned didst thou hymn when He rose from the dead, O apostle; and thou didst preach to the ends of the earth the God and man Who in His great goodness entered into fellowship with men. Wherefore, we lovingly bless thee, O Peter, bowing down before the chains, which thou didst bear for Christ, O all-glorious one. *Twice*

Glory..., in Tone VI: the composition of Byzantius—

Today Peter, the rock of faith, the foundation of the Church, provideth his precious chains for the piety of our souls. Come ye all and, kissing them, let us crown him with hymns of praise, chanting: Rejoice, fervent champion of the Faith who hast confessed Christ the Son of God with ardent knowledge and much boldness! Rejoice, joy of the whole world, keeper of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, who bestowest grace upon those who lovingly honor thee and kiss thy precious chains with longing! For, standing before the throne of Christ the King of all, thou prayest for us that celebrate thy memory.

Now & ever...: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day....”—

The all-immaculate Theotokos, beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, cried out, maternally lamenting: “O my Son and my God, save those who hymn Thee!”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory...., in Tone VI—

Peter, the rock of faith, the fervent intercessor, doth again invite us together to a spiritual feast, setting before us his precious chains as though they were food most rich, unto the healing of infirmities, the consolation of the sorrowful and the safe anchorage of the tempest-tossed. Come ye all, and, kissing them, let us entreat Him Who glorified him, saying: By his supplications, O Christ, save Thou our souls!

Now & ever...: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave birth unto Thee cried out: “What is this strange mystery that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended upon the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Without leaving Rome, thou art come to us in the precious chains which thou didst bear, O first-enthroned of the apostles; and, bowing down before them with faith we pray: By thy supplications unto God grant us great mercy!

At Matins:

Both canons from the Octoechos \[without the martyria\], and the canon of the apostle, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Peter, the foundation of the dogmas,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

ODE I

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

The whole Church of Christ keepeth festival in spirit, joining chorus and praising thee with faith, and lovingly kissing the precious chains which thou didst wear when thou wast bound, thereby binding the tyrant.

Fishing for men in the deep of deception, O Peter, thou didst draw them forth like fish unto Him Who chose thee from among fishermen to be truly the foremost of all His disciples. Wherefore, we kiss the chains which thou didst wear.

Upon the foundation of faith didst thou build up the souls of all the faithful; and having demolished the temples of delusion, O Peter, thou didst found Churches which ever honor thee aloud, and the chains which thou didst wear.

*Theotokion:* All the weapons of the deceitful enemy have utterly failed, O all-pure Virgin, and the Word Who made His abode in thine immaculate womb was not wounded in the least. I entreat thee: Let my heart now be wounded with the most sweet desire for Him.

ODE III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Wholly united to the Light most pure through divine partaking thereof, O Peter, thou hast been shown to be a secondary luminary enlightening our souls.

Thou hast confirmed the laws of Christ and hast taught observance of the law unto the most iniquitous, as the foremost of the apostles, the immovable foundation of the dogmas.

With thy sacred tongue thou didst preach God Who suffered and was crucified on the Cross. Wherefore, O Peter, we honor the chains which bound thee.

*Theotokion:* The irresistible onslaught of death came to a halt before thee, for thou gavest birth unto the Wellspring of immortality, O Theotokos, Virgin Mother.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...”—

Christ the Rock most splendidly glorifieth the rock of faith, the first-enthroned of His disciples; for He summoneth all to celebrate the wonders of thy precious chains, O Peter, and granteth forgiveness of offenses.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: Having been lifted up....:—

With faith do we praise thee, O apostle, as the chief of the wise apostles and the keeper of the keys to the kingdom of heaven; and with a pure conscience we kiss the chains which thou didst wear as though thou wast a malefactor, O Peter, thereby setting at naught the evil deeds of the enemy. From which pray thou that we be delivered. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

O thou who art more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim, and more spacious than heaven and earth, thou art shown to surpass creation, visible and invisible, in an ineluctable comparison; for He Whom the space of the heavens could not contain thou didst contain within thy womb, O pure one. Him do thou entreat, that thy servants be saved.

Or this stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter days gave birth in the flesh unto Thee Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “Woe is me, O Jesus, most blessed Christ! How is it that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels dost now deign to be crucified by iniquitous men, O my Son? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

ODE IV

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Speaking as a rhetor concerning the mighty works of the Master, thou didst convert the hearts of the disobedient Jews to the divine Faith, in that thou art the foundation of the Faith.

Thy journeys were known unto their Object: Him Who with all-abundant love walked upon the waters, O Peter, and related to thee the ways of God.

As thy divine chains possess the power to heal all manner of ailments, O blessed one, we kiss them with faith, honoring thee.

*Theotokion:* The King of all, having made His abode in thy holy womb as in a spacious palace, appeared incarnate, O all-immaculate Mistress.

ODE V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

By divine revelation Thou didst preach the Son Who with the Father is equally without beginning, and wast vouchsafed blessedness from the lips of the Blessed One.

When thou didst behold on Tabor the light which shone forth, blotting out the rays of the sun, thou wast illumined by the light which comest from the Light, O Peter, and hast enlightened the faithful.

Thou didst preach Christ Who was dead for three days, and for Whose sake thou didst wear chains, O Peter. Accounted worthy to bow down before them, we piously honor thee.

*Theotokion:* Lighten now the burden of me who am heavy laden with the weight of my many sins, O all-pure one, giving me strength to bear the easy yoke of Christ.

ODE VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Most wondrously didst thou endure crucifixion upside-down; for thus didst thou prepare thy feet for the path to heaven. Do thou strengthen us also to walk it, O disciple of Christ.

Thou didst make thine abode in the Life of the living and, bound for His sake, thou didst break the bonds of Belial who had bound thee. Wherefore, we honor thy chains.

Entreat the Master of creation, O most blessed one, that He send down purification, peace and mercy upon those who glorify thee, in that thou art His most fervent disciple.

*Theotokion:* Our forefather hath been stripped of the skin garments of mortality, for the Creator hath robed Himself therein through thy blood, becoming incarnate in manner past description, O all-immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “The Theotokos who is ever-vigilant in prayer....”—

Let us praise the great Peter, the chief and first among the apostles, the godly disciple of the Truth, and with faith let us kiss his chains, receiving release from our transgressions.

*Ikos:* What human tongue is able worthily to praise the great and glorious disciple of the Lord? What mind can praise him whom the Word of God blessed with a blessing? Yet what one attaineth according to his own powers, that should he bring as an offering unto God; and this I attempt to do. O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us piously crown the first-enthroned one with hymns, receiving released from our transgressions.

ODE VII

Irmos: Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thrice didst thou deny Christ; wherefore by a threefold question did He compensate for thine offense, O all-glorious Peter; and He showed forth the steadfastness of many who waver.

As a prisoner for Christ thou didst have thy share of divers bonds because of thy most sweet desire. Wherefore, with faith we bow down before thy chains which release us from the passions, O Peter.

Making a transit of the whole world like the sun most great, O Peter, glory of the apostles, who thyself didst behold Christ, thou hast banished the profound darkness of cruel polytheism.

Thou didst glorify Christ with thy members and didst become His boast, O all-glorious Peter. Wherefore, we glorify thee and bow down before the chains which bound thee.

*Theotokion:* He that descended upon the earth like rain hath in His divine knowledge watered the whole earth; and He hath shown thee forth, O pure Virgin, as more honorable than all the angels.

ODE VIII

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Working hard hearts like the soil, O Peter, thou didst render them most fertile for the Husbandman of creation Who gave thee the divine keys and the authority to loose and bind transgressions.

We ever bless thee, O Peter, and we venerate the chains which thou didst bear as though thou wert a malefactor, slaying the prince of evil and binding him with thy chains, O apostle.

Preserving the fullness of the Church by thine immovable rock of faith, O Peter, drive temptations from its midst and ask a peaceful estate therefor, O blessed Peter.

Thou didst splendidly preach Him Who bound hades and death with His bonds and all-pure sufferings; wherefore, O most blessed one, we are sanctified, kissing thy chains.

*Trinitarian:* Like the ranks of heaven we now cry out with thrice-holy voices, glorifying the Father, the Cause of all, and the Son and the Spirit: one Essence, one Power, and one Activity.

*Theotokion:* In writing the prophet described thee beforehand as a noetic candlestick bearing the divine Candle which hath illumined those who before were benighted by the darkness of evil, O Theotokos.

ODE IX

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thou wast accounted worthy to behold things afar off for which thou didst with faith hope, O Peter; and, rejoicing, thou hast received honors for thy labors from God Who loveth mankind, Whose divine suffering thou didst depict with thy flesh.

As the divine keeper of the keys of the kingdom, open the gates thereof unto those who faithfully honor thee on earth and kiss the precious chains wherewith thou wast bound, O Peter.

Whilst thou wast with the Son on Tabor, thou wast vouchsafed to hear the voice of the Father reveal Him; for, cleansed by the divine Spirit, thy heart was most gloriously illumined, O Peter.

O Peter, ask thou cleansing, release from debts and the delight of the kingdom of heaven for us that with love honor thee and kiss the chains wherewith thou wast bound.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the abode of the Light, O Maiden; wherefore, by thy light guide me who am benighted by all the temptations of the enemy, that I may magnify thee with faith, O most pure Virgin Mother.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the holy place....”—

O most blessed Peter, chief among the apostles, loose me, who am bound by the chains of the passions, wretch that I am, as once the angel of God loosed thy chains, leading thee forth most gloriously from the dungeon wherein thou wast imprisoned, O blessed one.

Theotokion±—

O all-immaculate Virgin, thou art known as a Mother, for thou gavest birth unto God and man in manner transcending nature; and thine Offspring is become salvation unto those who chant with love: Glory, honor and worship are due to the unapproachable and divine Trinity!

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory...., in Tone IV: the composition of John the Monk—

By His thrice put question, “Lovest thou Me, O Peter?”, Christ set aright thy threefold denial. And when Simon said to Him Who knoweth the secrets of men: “O Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee,” the Savior the said to Him: “Feed my sheep; feed Mine elect; feed My lambs, which I have acquired for salvation by Mine own blood.” Him do thou entreat, O divinely blessed apostle, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever...: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the Ewe-lamb who had given Thee birth lamented and maternally exclaimed to Thee: “O my Son most desired, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed by the iniquitous, O long-suffering Word, and Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Odes III and VI of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Acts of the Apostles, §29 \[12:1-11\]

In those days, Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. \(Then were the days of unleavened bread.\) And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Passover to bring him forth to the people. Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison. And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying: “Arise up quickly.” And his chains fell off from his hands. And the angel said unto him: “Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals.” And so he did. And he said unto him: “Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.” And he went out, and followed him; and knew not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of its own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himself, he said: “Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent His angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.”

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to John, §67 \[21:15-23\].

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again a second time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him a third time: “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time: “Lovest thou Me?” And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto Him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He said unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following, who had also leaned on His breast at supper, and He said: “Lord, which is he who betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me.”

Communion verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

