The 17th Day Of The Month Of January

Commemoration Of Our Venerable & God-Bearing Father Anthony The Great

If the superior so desire, we celebrate a vigil

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When, rejoicing, thou didst enclose thyself in the tomb, O father, out of love for Christ, thou didst mightily endure the temptations of the demons, and by prayer and grace thou didst drive away their webs of perverse vexation. Then did the ranks of the angels assemble, crying: Glory to Him Who hath strengthened thee, O Anthony! *Twice*

Thou didst show thyself to be another Elijah, having thy glorious disciples like Elisha, O wise one; and to them thou didst leave a twofold measure of grace, O father, when thou wast caught up as on an aerial chariot. Wherefore, living in the Spirit, thou now rejoicest with them, O most blessed one. Be thou mindful of those who celebrate thine honored solemnity with love, O Anthony.

Like Moses the God-seer thou didst truly enter the noetic darkness of visions, and didst straightway clearly behold Him Whom thou didst desire. And thy face was filled with glory by His radiance, O father, that thou mightest guide men to the abodes of salvation. Wherefore, having assembled, we cry out, rejoicing: Glory to Christ God Who strengthened thee!

Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone III—

O venerable Anthony, thou didst perfect a life of most constant suffering of burning heat and cold, finding thy rest as amid unwaning splendors; for having united thyself spiritually to those of the desert, thou didst trample down the fiery darts of the demons. And having transcended every virtue, thou makest thine abode with the angels in the kingdom of heaven. With them beseech Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

From earliest infancy thou wast shown to be a consecrated vessel, O God-bearing Anthony, and a habitation of the most Holy Spirit.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Having put to shame the delusions of the wicked demons by the power of the Cross, thou didst shine forth the glory of Christ, O father Anthony.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Like Elijah thou wast caught up on a chariot of fire, and didst pass directly to the Trinity, O blessed Anthony, universal father.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The choirs on high chant with those below, O Virgin Theotokos, unceasingly glorifying thine all-pure birthgiving.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

O thou who wast illumined with the rays of the Spirit, when divine desire set thee afire and gave wings to thy soul, that thou mightest truly desire the summit of His love, then didst thou overcome flesh and blood, and didst transcend the world, uniting thyself to Him with great abstinence and solitude. Wherefore, thou wast filled there, for thou didst ask for the good things from thence, and didst shine forth like a star, enlightening our souls, O Anthony. *Thrice*

Having broken the bows and arrows, the malice of the demons and their pursuit, with the grace of the divine Spirit, thou didst make them plain to all with divine doctrines, illumined with divine splendors. And thou wast a lamp of divine radiance for monastics, the first adorner of the desert, a most skillful physician of the infirm, and the pristine image of a virtuous life, O father Anthony. *Thrice*

Pure of soul and heart, an earthly angel, a heavenly man, a teacher of virginity, an excellent standard of abstinence, O Anthony, who dwellest with thy Master, offering Him continual glorification with the angels and the venerable, and with all the martyrs, O blessed one, from cruel tribulations and transgressions free those who ever celebrate thy sacred memory. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Having preserved that which is in the image of God, and set thy mind as master over the pernicious passions through fasting, thou didst ascend to that which is in the likeness of God, as far as thou wast able; for, compelling thy nature manfully, thou didst strive to subdue that which is baser to that which is more sublime, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be the summit of monastics, a citizen of the desert, a trainer of those who run the good race, a most excellent rule of virtue. And in purity thou now beholdest the Holy Trinity in the heavens, not by reflection as by a mirror, and thou prayest directly for those who honor thee with faith and love.

Now & ever…: Doxasticon, in the same tone—

Who doth not call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn thine all-pure birthgiving? For the only-begotten Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, the pure one; and being God by nature, He became man for our sake, not divided into two Persons, but known in two natures without confusion. Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(3:1-9\)

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(5:1-6:3\)

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon \(4:8-15\)

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the saint, the composition of the Studite: Idiomela, in Tone II—

Having instituted ascetic training on earth, O venerable Anthony, thou didst drown all the assaults of the passions in the flow of thy tears. Thy God-pleasing life hath been recognized by all as a divine and precious ladder rising up to the heavens. For, having shown forth the fruits of piety within thyself, thou thereby healest the weakness of the passions of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, O golden-rayed star of the East, luminary and shepherd of monastics! Rejoice, O ever-memorable one, most comely offspring of the desert and unshakable foundation of the Church! Rejoice, great guide of the lost! Rejoice, O our boast, thou radiant joy of the whole world!

Let us honor Anthony, the earthly angel and heavenly man of God, the goodly adornment of the world, the enjoyment of good works and the virtues, the boast of fasters; for, planted in the house of God, he flourished in righteousness, and like a cedar in the wilderness, he hath increased the flock of Christ’s reason-endowed sheep in holiness and righteousness.

O venerable father, having diligently exercised thyself in virtue from childhood, thou becamest an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and, receiving from Him the ability to work miracles, thou didst exhort men to spurn that which is sweet. And now, most purely illumined with divine light, enlighten also our thoughts, O father Anthony.

Glory…, in Tone V—

O venerable father, having listened to the words of the Gospel of the Lord, thou didst depart from the world, considering riches and glory to be as naught. Wherefore, thou didst cry out to all: Love God, and ye shall receive everlasting grace; prefer naught to His love, that when He shall come in His glory, ye shall find rest with all the saints. By his supplications, O Christ, preserve and save our souls!

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, for from thee shone forth Christ, the Sun of righteousness, Who hath great mercy.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O boast of the ascetics…”—

Rejoice, O Anthony, joining the choirs in the highest; for, having truly trained thyself by virtue, O father, thou didst live their life on earth, showing thyself to be a most pure and undimmed mirror reflecting the radiant beams of the brilliance of the all-holy Spirit, O most blessed one. Wherefore, illumined, thou didst behold things that were to come, foretelling them all, taught by the manifestation of the divine light of Christ. Him do thou beseech, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, thou who wast the first leader and invincible champion of ascetics! For cutting off the roots of the passions and the assaults of the demons, contending thou didst manfully denounce their weakness and soul-destroying deceit; and thou didst reveal the activity and invincible power of the Cross of the Savior, and, girding thyself therewith, thou didst withstand all who rejected the divine manifestation of Christ in the flesh. Him do thou beseech, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Established as a radiant pillar of virtue, thou wast shown to be a cloud overshadowing those in the desert, leading from earth to heaven those who behold God. And with the staff of the Cross thou didst part the sea of the passions, vanquishing the noetic Amalek, and didst find the sure path to heaven and an incorrupt inheritance, O blessed of God, joyfully standing before the throne of Christ with the incorporeal ones. Him do thou beseech, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee, O Anthony our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; for following thy steps we have truly learned how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, having labored for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels and companion of Paul of Thebes. With them pray thou to the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Emulating the ways of the zealous Elijah, and following the Baptist with forthright steps, O father Anthony, thou wast a dweller in the desert, and hast made the whole world steadfast by thy supplications. Wherefore, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before…”—

Thou didst follow the call of thy Lord, rejecting the world and all the beautiful things in the world, O most blessed Anthony; and thou didst diligently bear the discomfort of the desert, and didst manfully rout the hordes of the demons. Wherefore, we ever faithfully praise thy memory with hymns. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

By thy birthgiving, O pure one, thou hast renewed the mortal essence of those born on earth, which had become corrupt through the passions, and thou hast raised all up from death to the life of incorruption. Wherefore, we all bless thee as is meet, O all-glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

With hymns let us honor the faster of the Lord, as one who truly mortified all the assaults of the passions with abstinence and steadfast endurance, who utterly put to shame the adverse foe and all his pride, and now prayeth to the Lord, that our souls find mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

An awesome miracle of conception and an ineffable type of birthgiving have been recognized in thee, O pure Ever-virgin, and they fill my mind with awe and amaze my thoughts. Thy glory, O Theotokos, hath extended in all things, unto the salvation of our souls.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Anthony, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monastics and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having received pastoral skill, O pillar and ground of monastics, with strength thou didst shepherd thy reason-endowed flock; for, desiring the divine teachings of Christ, thou didst sow the word therein, O venerable one. Wherefore, thou didst raise all up to the zeal of the angelic life, to glorify God with oneness of mind, O God-bearing Anthony. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions to those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Let us hymn the heavenly door and ark, the most holy mountain, the radiant cloud, the unburnt bush, the noetic garden of paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of the whole world, for in her have salvation and the remission of the ancient transgressions been wrought for the world. Wherefore, we cry out to her: Entreat thy Son, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who piously worship thy most holy Offspring.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43 \[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed the hordes of the demons, and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our souls.

Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant praise unto the Life-bearing Maiden”, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Traversing the impassable, uncommon path of the sea dryshod, Israel the chosen cried aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for He hath been glorified!

The immaterial ladder of old and the path of the sea made strangely firm showed forth thy birthgiving, O pure one, whom we all hymn, for thou hast been glorified!

The power of the Most High, the perfect Hypostasis, the Wisdom of God incarnate of thee, O all-pure one, hath entered into fellowship with men, for He hath been glorified!

The Sun of thy righteousness hath passed through the impassible door of thy locked womb, O pure one, and hath shone forth upon the world, for He hath been glorified!

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “It is good to praise the godly Anthony”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Manifestly embracing immortality and life everlasting, and delighting in threefold radiance, O father, pray thou that my darkened soul may be illumined with grace, that I may hymn thee as is meet.

Though thou wast small of bodily stature, choosing the new path of virtue thou didst tread it safely, obedient to the new law of the Savior and following the life-bearing precepts of the Gospel, O thrice blessed one.

Illumined with the effulgence of the threefold Sun, O most wise and blessed one, afire with divine desire thou didst destroy the savagery of the demons, the mouths of the wild beasts and the pain of sores as though they were a spider’s web.

*Theotokion:* Possessing boldness, as the Mother of God, before the only-begotten Son Who hath been born of thee, and the equally beginningless Father, and the consubstantial Spirit, cease thou never to pray, that They save from tribulations those who glorify thee as the Theotokos, O most immaculate one.

*Katavasia:* The irmoi of the canon of the Meeting of the Lord.

Ode III

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty hath been broken by Thy might, O Christ, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power.

He Who, as the Creator of time, is outside all time, O Virgin, willingly made Himself a Child through thee.

Let us hymn the womb which is far more spacious than the heavens, through which Adam hath made his abode in the heavens, rejoicing.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

With steadfast mind and mighty endurance thou didst cause the flame of the passions to die out, O father Anthony, and thou didst array thyself in the splendid vesture of dispassion and the robe of salvation.

Thou didst disdain the feeble power of the demons who dared mighty assaults and assumed the guise of wild beasts; for thou didst have a mighty Ally in battle.

Denouncing the princes and powers of darkness, O Anthony, through mighty asceticism thou becamest a God-bearer, a mighty victor, the glory of ascetics and boast of monastics.

*Theotokion:* By the activity of the Life Who manifested Himself to the world through thee, O pure one, raise up my mind which hath been slain, and guide it to Life, O thou who alone hast destroyed the gates of death by thy birthgiving.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having bound thy soul to the love of Christ, and wisely hated all the things of the earth, O venerable father, thou madest thine abode in the deserts and mountains; for, having tasted of the noetic tree, O glorious initiate of the mysteries, thou didst shine forth like an angel with never-waning rays. Wherefore, having passed through the darkness of thy flesh, thou didst dispel the gloom of the demons, O Anthony, first-chosen among monastics. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O all-hymned one, most immaculate Bride of the Creator, Mother of the Deliverer, who knewest not man: As the receptacle of the Comforter, make haste to deliver me, who am the vile abode of iniquity and in mind am become the plaything of the demons, from their evil wiles; and make me the splendid dwelling-place of the virtues, O radiant one untouched by corruption. Drive away the clouds of the passions and vouchsafe that, by thy supplications, I may receive a portion on high and a share in the never-waning light.

Ode IV

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, of Thy glorious dispensation, and I have glorified Thine unapproachable power, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Behold! the most manifest Mother of God, the divine mountain of the house of the Lord, is exalted far above the heavenly powers.

O Virgin, who, alone outside the laws of nature, gavest birth unto the Ruler of creation: thou hast been vouchsafed a divine calling.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Using the divine ladder of the virtues, O father, thou didst mount to the top, and didst behold God standing thereon, distributing gifts with His generous hand unto those who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou alone didst dedicate thyself wholly to God alone, O Anthony, uniting thyself to Him with virtue and spiritual discourses, and as thou art pure, thou hast been vouchsafed divine revelation; for, having abandoned the earth and the things of the earth, thou hast received heavenly delight, as is meet.

Having purified mind and soul, O father Anthony, thou didst denounce the soul-destroying deceit, the wiles, bitter delusions and phantasms of the enemy; for, having trained, thou didst achieve mastery, and having achieved mastery, thou teachest multitudes of monastics, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Beseech the God Who was incarnate of thee, Who immutably remained what He was, Who is equal to the Father in essence and became consubstantial with thee who gavest Him birth, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions and salvation of soul to those who hymn thee with faith.

Ode V

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The Sun—the live Coal which was revealed beforehand to Isaiah—shone forth from the Virgin’s womb, granting the enlightenment of divine knowledge to those gone astray in darkness.

Clouds of darkness rain down delight upon those who are on earth, for unto us hath a Child been given, Who hath existed from before the ages: our God, incarnate of the Virgin.

Light hath shone forth upon my life and my flesh, and hath destroyed the gloom of sin: the most Exalted One, Who in the latter days was incarnate without seed of the Virgin.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Having God Who seeth all things living within thee, O blessed one, teaching, enlightening and making thee wise, thou wast vouchsafed to behold the ascents of pure and blessed souls, O thrice-blessed one.

O wise one, Christ hath given thee the grace to heal divers ailments and power against unclean spirits; for, having vanquished nature supernaturally, O father, thou didst receive a share of the gifts of the Spirit.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as a rampart, and preserved by thine intercession, we bless thee, boasting in thy divine glory; for thou, O most pure one, pourest forth gladness and joy upon our souls.

Ode VI

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Hearkening to the sound of the cries of entreaty which issue forth from a soul in pain, O Master, deliver me from my grievous sins, for Thou alone art the Cause of our salvation.

Human nature, enslaved to sin, hath obtained freedom through thee, O pure Lady; for thy Son hath been sacrificed like a lamb.

We all cry out to thee, the true Mother of God: Save thou thy wrathful servants, for thou alone hast boldness before thy Son.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The abyss of my sins and the tempest of my transgressions discomfit me and thrust me down into the depths of violent despondency; but stretch forth Thy mighty arm unto me, as Thou didst to Peter, and save my, O my Guide.

Accepting the life of God’s law from thine earliest childhood, O divinely wise one, as an athlete thou didst preserve it even unto the end; and as a godly warrior thou hast received the crown of victory from the King of all.

Having thee as a mighty advocate before God, an intercessor, a champion and pious mediator, who sharest in our cares, we are saved from all manner of tribulations, perils and evil circumstances.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast truly raised up fallen human nature, O Mother of God, having borne in thy womb, without seed, the immutable Son, Who is visible in divine appearance and in His equality with the Father.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Having cast off the tumults of life, thou didst live a life of stillness to the end, emulating the Baptist in every way, O all-venerable one. Wherefore, we honor thee with him, O Anthony, first among the fathers.

*Ikos:* Hearkening to the voice of Christ, thou didst follow His commandments, and, stripping off thy former life, thou didst put aside all the cares of possessions, property and thy slaves, as well as the love of thy sister, O God-bearing Anthony; and most purely conversing alone with God in the deserts, thou didst receive the grace of understanding, which do thou send upon me who praise thee in hymns, O Anthony, first among the fathers.

Ode VII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The youths of old showed themselves to be rhetors with the greatest love of wisdom; for, theologizing with their lips, they chanted from the depths of their God-pleasing souls: O most divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

At night Jacob beheld God as in a dream, and He that was incarnate of thee hath manifested Himself in splendor unto those who chant: Most divine and supremely glorified is the God of our fathers!

He that wrestled with Jacob prefigured the ineffable union in thee, O pure one, whereby He willingly united Himself to mankind: He is the most divine and supremely glorified God of our fathers!

The vile one who had refused to proclaim Thee, the Son of the Virgin, to be One of the all-hymned Trinity, cried out with steadfast thought and with his tongue: Most divine and supremely glorified is the God of our fathers!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thy cheeks were as phials of perfume, emitting the sweet fragrance of the virtues and salvation, as from a garden, upon those who cry with faith: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The grace of the most Holy Spirit, dwelling within thee, O father, made thee a dispeller of the wickedness of evil spirits and an instructor of monks, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Let us praise the all-pure and most holy Mary; for through her the grace of spiritual gifts is poured forth upon us past understanding, as from a torrent of divine goodness. Let us bless her now with pious intent.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The thrice-blessed youths, disdaining the golden image and beholding the immutable and living image of God, chanted in the midst of the flame: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

He that is incomparable in grace and might through thee became visible on earth and dwelt with men. Chanting unto Him, O all ye faithful, let us cry out: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly proclaiming thee the pure one, we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou didst give birth to the One of the Trinity Who became incarnate. And to Him, with the Father and the Spirit, do we sing: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like an angel on earth showing, by purity of mind, vigilance in prayer, might in ascetic endeavors and endurance amid tribulations, O Anthony, thou didst cry out to God: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ever approaching God through supplications and entreaties, O venerable one, thou didst ascend to the highest summit, escaping the snares of the demons; and, freed from their tyranny, O divinely wise one, thou dost chant: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Like a new Moses, thou didst win a victory over the foes and adversaries in the desert, guiding thy people, the assembly of ascetics, in joy and newness of life; and they cry out to the Master: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O most pure Theotokos, cleanse the wounds of my soul and the stripes of my sins, washing them with the springs which issue forth from the side of thine Offspring, and purifying them with the streams which flow therefrom; for to thee do I cry, to thee do I flee and on thee do I call, who art full of the grace of God.

Ode IX

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Thou art all desire, all sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the Virgin, God of gods, all-holy Lord of the saints. Wherefore, we magnify Thee and her who gave Thee birth.

In thy womb, O pure one, the Word of God was given to corruptible nature as a staff of strength. And He restored what had been dragged down to hell. Wherefore, we magnify thee, O all-pure one, as the Theotokos.

O Master, mercifully accept Thy mother as an intercessor in our behalf, as is Thy pleasure, and all things shall be filled with Thy goodness, that we all may magnify Thee as our Benefactor.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

O most blessed father Anthony, thy splendid feast hath dawned, full of joy, full of spiritual gladness, full of the Holy Spirit, full of sweet fragrance and enlightenment; and having thee now as a rule and giver of the laws of asceticism, we rejoice.

Never cease to pray to the Deliverer, O most honored father, that He grant to those who reverently celebrate thy sacred memory remission of transgressions, the reception of spiritual gifts, divine intercession, salvation of soul and everlasting joy.

Having lived angelically upon the earth, thou hast found the splendor of the angels; for thou hast obtained a share of their God-seeing effulgence. And with them thou dost ever rejoice, as a prophet of God, a crowned martyr, preëminent among monastics.

*Theotokion:* Without seed, without carnal desire, O Virgin, thou didst conceive the Word of God Who created all things, and thou gavest birth to Him without corruption, without experiencing the pangs of motherhood. Wherefore, confessing thee with tongue and heart, we magnify thee, the Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable…”—

O Anthony, father of fathers, thou hast been shown to be a light for those who share thy way of life, having taught the pious to tread the paths of light; and thou emittest the flame and fire of lightning, consuming hordes of the demons.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

With unceasing hymns we bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, in that thou gavest birth to One of the Trinity, and didst bear in thy divine embrace the Word Who is immutably and unchangeably transcendent.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O venerable father Anthony, taking the yoke of Christ upon thy shoulders, thou didst valiantly trample the visitation of the enemy underfoot, and didst bring forth cities in the desert; for which cause, we all honor thee with faith, O most blessed one, thou boast of monastics. Wherefore, unceasingly beseech Christ, that we be saved. *Twice*

Assembling with faith, we all honor thee, O Anthony, as an ascetic of Christ; for, rejoicing, thou didst tread the trackless wilderness, O wise one, and becamest an honored instructor. Wherefore, we cry out to thee with faith: O most blessed boast of monastics, pray thou for us to the Lord, that we be saved!

O venerable father Anthony, thou didst enclose thyself in a tomb for the sake of true life, and wast in nowise affrighted by the invisible foe; for though they descended upon thee to smite thee, by thy prayers thou didst render them insensible, O thou of forthright soul, first leader of the desert. Wherefore, we all honor and bless thee with faith.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Ascending from the desert to heaven on the ladder of the virtues, O wondrous one, thou didst attain its bastions through ascetic endeavor, encircling the beauties of the celestial Jerusalem; and, receiving honors through thy painful struggles as is meet, thou rejoicest with the ranks of heaven, O most blessed one, becoming an heir to everlasting good things and an inhabitant of the kingdom. O God-bearing Anthony, entreat the Savior of all, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparion of the saint. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III, & 4 from Ode VI of the saint’s canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335 \[13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[6: 17-23\].

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

