The 18th Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of Our Fathers among the Saints Athanasius & Cyril, Archbishops of Alexandria

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for Saint Athanasius, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Thou didst undergo persecution and didst endure tribulation, O divinely eloquent and venerable Athanasius, until thou didst drive out the falsehood of the ungodly Arius and save thy flock from impiety, proclaiming as Orthodox dogma that the Son and the Spirit are of the same essence as the Father, O sacred and most blessed minister.

Thou didst illumine those in darkness with the splendors of thy preaching, and didst drive out all falsehood, steadfastly braving danger for the Faith as a true pastor, O Athanasius, as an unshakable foundation of the Church of Christ, O all-glorious one. Wherefore, assembling, we honor thee, rejoicing in hymnody.

Thou didst gradually master every virtue, O divinely inspired one, and, anointed with the holy unction of the Spirit, thou wast manifestly a most sacred minister, a true pastor and a champion of the Faith. Wherefore, the whole Church doth glorify thy memory, celebrating in sacred manner and glorifying the Savior.

And 3 stichera of Saint Cyril, in the same tone & melody—

With the staff of thy teachings thou didst drive the spiritual wolves from the Church of Christ, O Cyril; thou didst gird it round about with the ramparts of thy words, and hast presented it to Christ unshaken and intact. Him do thou beseech, that He deliver from corruption and tribulation those who celebrate thy most honored memory with faith.

Illumining thy mind with the splendors of the Spirit, thou didst become a radiant sun, shedding thy precepts upon the ends of the earth, like rays, and enlightening the fullness of the faithful, O most blessed one. And thou hast dispelled the darkness of heresies with the power of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin, O God-bearer.

With the eloquence of thy discourses the whole Church hath been adorned, O most sacred Cyril; it is piously bedecked with thy comely beauties and doth in sacred manner honor thy holy and right renowned memory, O glorious one, thou boast of the Orthodox, summit of the fathers, champion of the all-holy one at the Council.

Glory…, the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI—

Let us all hymn Athanasius, the hierarch of Christ, for he set at naught all the opinions of Arius and clearly proclaimeth throughout the world the dominion of the Holy Trinity: the one God, indivisible, in three Persons. Him doth he beseech in behalf of us who celebrate his memory with faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

The most immaculate Theotokos, seeing our Life hanging upon the Tree, cried out, lamenting maternally: “O my Son and my God, save those who hymn Thee with love!”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, the composition of Germanus, in Tone III—

Again doth the golden Nile, the namesake of immortality, coming upon us in his annual commemoration, put forth golden waves of immortality in goodly ascents, producing sweet fruit by his lofty divine proclamations: for he teacheth us to worship the indivisible dominion of the Trinity and, pouring forth divine doctrines, he floodeth the thoughts of the faithful and prayeth for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion—

A sword pierced thy heart, O all-pure one, when thou didst behold thy Son upon the Cross; and thou didst cry out: “Show me not to be childless, O my Son and my God Who hast kept me a Virgin even after I gave birth!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their entreaties direct our life in peace.

Or this troparion, in Tone III—

Resplendent with works of Orthodoxy and reducing all heresy to ashes, ye were victors and conquerors, enriching all with piety; and, having greatly adorned the Church, ye have acquired Christ God, as is meet, Who granteth us great mercy.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon of Saint Athanasius, the acrostic whereof is: “Athanasius was the boast of Orthodoxy”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Offering up laudation unto Athanasius and praising his virtue, I offer yet higher praise to God, Who hath given men the praiseworthy gift of virtue, of which he was the animate image and seal.

Thou wast full of divine wisdom, O blessed and venerable one, shining now in thine angelic life more than the sun; and thou hast surpassed the laws of praise which govern us. Yet accept it from us, O father, even though we are not worthy to praise thee.

Though we are bereft of mighty works, we weave hymnody as is meet, O Athanasius, according to the dignity of thy hymns; and we ask that through thee we be granted forgiveness and the abundant grace of the Spirit.

As a youth thou didst mortify the uprisings of the carnal passions, acquiring in thy youth the right constant wisdom of an elder, O blessed Athanasius; for thou didst govern all thy senses with the desire of wisdom.

*Theotokion:* All-glorious things have been spoken of thee among generations of generations, for thou didst contain God the Word in thy womb, and didst remain pure, O Theotokos Mary. Wherefore, we all honor thee, after God, as our intercessor.

Canon of Saint Cyril, the acrostic whereof is: “Cyril is the harp of the vision of God”, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Receiving light-giving grace from God, and manifest as a radiant beacon, O Cyril, thou hast shone forth rays of reason upon us on the day of thy commemoration, that we may hymn thee as is meet.

Thou wast full of the effulgence of the Spirit, O wise Cyril, as a keeper of the commandments of Christ, cleansed of the passions; and thou wast truly a dwelling-place of the all-divine Trinity.

Filled with zeal and boldness, O glorious Cyril, and defending Orthodoxy, thou didst truly rebuke all those who opposed God and the endless pratings of their vile heresies.

*Theotokion:* O most pure Bride of God, thou gavest birth to One of the all-divine Trinity Who through thee revealed Himself to us in the flesh, at the Father’s good pleasure and with the coöperation of the most Holy Spirit.

Ode III

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Having cleansed thy soul and body of all defilement, O Athanasius, thou wast shown forth as a temple rightly divine. Wherefore, the fullness of the Trinity rested within thee, O most blessed initiate of the sacred mysteries.

The grace of the Comforter, finding thy soul purified of the passions, manifestly showed its activity therein, O father, and hath set thee forth as an all-radiant beacon for the world.

Thou wast shown forth as a standard of hierarchy for bishops, the model for a life of spiritual activity. Thy discourse, the form of thy vision and the breadth of thy theology and doctrine were manifestly revealed, O all-wise one.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be more exalted than the cherubim and the seraphim; for thou alone didst receive the infinite God in thy womb, O undefiled one. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, bless thee with hymns, O pure one.

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Strengthened by Christ, O Cyril, with unwavering intent thou didst rend apart the machinations of the evil serpent as though they were a spider’s web.

Thou didst scrape the mire of the passions from thy soul, O Cyril, casting down every evil thought which rose up against Christ.

Like a successful athlete, O father, thou didst avoid every carnal pleasure as vainglorious and treacherous.

*Theotokion:* Having been cleansed beforehand by the Spirit, O pure one, thou gavest birth to the Word of the Father, the Essence of reason, unto our benefaction.

Kontakion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

O sacred primates most great, champions of the Church of Christ, preserve all who chant: Save those who honor Thee with faith, O Compassionate One!

Sessional hymn of Saint Athanasius, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity…”—

As He Who chose thee beforehand named thee, thou wast the embodiment of immortality, piously slaying all the opinions of Arius; for thou wast an unscathed champion of the truth, O father Athanasius, thou boast of the Orthodox. Wherefore, hymning thee as is meet, we celebrate thy godly memory.

Glory…, that of Saint Cyril, in the same tone & melody—

Thou didst denounce the falsehood of heresies and didst elucidate the Orthodox Faith; and as one divinely eloquent and pious thou didst preach throughout the world that men should worship the one Godhead in Trinity, consubstantial in Essence and unconfused as to Persons. Wherefore, assembling, we honor thy memory, O most glorious Cyril.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The awesome mystery of God which was wrought in thee, O divinely joyous Mistress, is incomprehensible and unattainable; for, conceiving the Infinite One, thou gavest birth unto Him wrapped in flesh through thine all-pure blood. Him do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.

Stavrotheotokion—

Thy pure Mother who knew not wedlock, O Christ, seeing Thee hanging dead upon the Cross, said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous and thankless synagogue of the Jews recompensed Thee, Who delighted them with Thy manifold and great gifts, O my Son? I hymn Thy divine condescension!”

Ode IV

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

All the life-bearing inspiration of the Spirit of Christ, which in godly manner descended from on high into the upper chamber of old, breathed upon thee, O father, and showed thee to be a thirteenth apostle who preached the Orthodox Faith.

Burning exceedingly with divine zeal while taking part in the Council in Nicæa before thou wast consecrated to the hierarchy, thou didst preach the consubstantiality of the Trinity. Wherefore, Christ made thee a chief shepherd and teacher of the Church.

Having the helm of the Church entrusted to thee by the providence of God, O Athanasius, as with a scythe thou didst mow down all the spiritually harmful pratings of the heretics, cutting them down like weeds; and, watering the seed of the Word, thou didst wisely cultivate it.

Thy fiery tongue burned up the unnatural division made by Arius and the mingling of Sabbelius, and every heretical blasphemy with them, which are boundless evil and veritable ungodliness, O Athanasius.

*Theotokion:* Thou art the boast of the faithful, O unwedded one; thou art the intercessor and refuge of Christians, their bulwark and haven. For thou dost bear entreaties to thy Son, O most immaculate one, and savest from misfortunes those who with faith and love acknowledge thee to be the pure Theotokos.

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Christ, seeing thee victorious over soul-corrupting passions and mastering the flesh by thy thought, O God-bearing father Cyril, set thee as primate over His divine Church.

Having, as a beloved son, inherited the paternal virtue of Mark, thou wast an heir to his cathedra, following the steps of the godly evangelist.

Tended like a lamb by Christ, as a shepherd thou didst nurture thy flock with thy spiritually nourishing discourses, as with grace and flowers, feeding them abundantly with grace.

*Theotokion:* He Who by His divine power created all things out of nothing, O Mother of God, rejoiceth in thee, illumining the world with the radiant beams of His divinity and with the effulgence of the knowledge of God.

Ode V

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Having Christ speaking in the eloquent instrument of thy tongue, O father Athanasius, in writing thou didst put to shame the heresy of the idols, guiding those astray and converting them to the true God.

With discourses and writings thou didst denounce all pernicious heresies, O blessed father, dispelling from the whole world divers falsehoods with thy wise proofs, elucidating the Orthodox Faith irrefutably.

The Church of Christ calleth thee directly the truly great teacher of wise doctrines, O father Athanasius, and hath numbered with the apostles thee who revealest the unadulterated word of the Faith.

*Theotokion:* Having acquired maternal boldness toward thy Son, O most pure one, reject not thought of kinship with us, we pray; for we set thee before Christ as the only merciful cleansing of Christians.

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Contemplating the countenance of Christ now face to face, no longer by reflection as in a mirror, O Cyril, thou hast been united to thy desire.

Thy discourse, O Cyril, hath been likened truly to the mighty torrent of a river in full flood, toppling the machinations of the heretics.

O Cyril, thou didst overturn the vile division of Arius and the abominable mingling of Sabbelius alike.

Thou hast left to the Church of Christ thy rich discourses like treasures of gold and precious stones, O Cyril.

*Theotokion:* We set thee forth as an invincible weapon against the enemy, O Bride of God, for we have acquired thee as the confirmation and hope of our salvation.

Ode VI

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Apollinarius, having shown himself to be a sower of the alien seed of earthly discourse and understanding, is mightily denounced by thee, O most blessed one, as senseless and foolish of mind, in thy work on the incarnation of Christ.

We the faithful draw forth honey most sweet, like water from a bowl, from the ever-flowing wellspring of grace which floweth in torrents of discourse pouring forth from thy lips, O venerable one.

Everyone doth marvel at the magnificence of thy wise writings, exclaiming in love, O wise father, foreseeing the heresies which would spring forth to be rejected by thee prophetically.

*Theotokion:* May we be delivered from grievous transgressions by thine entreaties, O pure Theotokos; and may we receive divine illumination from the Son of God Who was ineffably incarnate of thee, O most pure one.

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

The seraph bore the burning ember to the prophet with tongs, but thou, O initiate of the sacred mysteries, dost give to the Church of Christ the purifying ember of divine fire with thine own hands.

Thou didst not destroy the neighboring Philistines as did Samson, but didst cast down the aliens of heterodox doctrine and give might to the Orthodox, O Cyril.

Manifestly heading the divinely elect Council, O father, filled with zeal for the true Mother of God thou didst cast down the heresy of Nestorius, the audacity which opposeth Christ, O father.

*Theotokion:* O wonder newer than all other wonders! Conceiving in her womb, without having known a man, Him Who sustaineth all things, the Virgin did not confine Him!

Kontakion of Saint Athanasius, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Of thy blood…”—

Planting Orthodox doctrine, thou didst mow down the tares of heresy, causing the seed of faith to increase through the rain of the Spirit, O venerable one. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O Athanasius.

*Ikos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us praise today the most festive memory of Athanasius and Cyril; for they cast into the abyss of perdition Arius the deceiver, Eunomius and Sabbelius, committing them to immolation in everlasting fire, for they unjustly blasphemed the incarnation of the Savior. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O Athanasius.

Ode VII

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Having in Orthodox manner preached that the Word is equal in honor and equally enthroned with the Father and His only-begotten Son, O father, namesake of immortality, thou dost straightway teach that the Spirit is also equally enthroned, of one essence and equally eternal.

The father of impiety, seeing that thou wast a manifestly sacred proclaimer and teacher of the light of the threefold Sun who declared the Orthodox Faith unto the ends of the earth, raised persecutions against thee.

The countless tribulations which thou didst endure, O blessed one, struggling for piety, were also splendid crowns; for thou wast like adamant to those who struck at thee, and didst draw all to thee like a magnet.

Strange doctrines foreign to the Church of Christ didst thou cast out, theologizing concerning the Trinity of Hypostases, the unity of the Godhead, Whom thou didst hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Now have all things been filled with divine light through thee, O all-pure one; for thou wast shown to be the portal through which God conversed with the world, enlightening with faith those who cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Moses of old, entering the darkness on Mount Sinai, received the law which slayeth by the letter, O Cyril; but thou hast disclosed the hidden beauty of the Spirit.

The covering of protection given of old to the children through the indistinct images of the law did thou disclose like roses of understanding, O father, plainly elucidating the images.

Inspired by the grace of the prophets, O Cyril, in pure manner thou hast revealed to us that the books of the God-pleasing divine preachers are full of the Spirit.

Theologizing that there are three Hypostases in an unconfused divine Unity, unseparated by division, O father Cyril, thou hast plainly said that They are immutable in one Essence and Godhead.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O hallowed and divine habitation of the Most High! For through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O Athanasius, thou right glorious adornment of hierarchs, pillar of light and confirmation of the Church, champion of the Trinity, golden clarion of theology, famed recorder of the rules of the monastic life: thou dost celebrate with us, making priests and leading the faithful people to Christ forever.

Thou wast a true namesake of immortality, for thou didst surpass works with thy discourse; and, vanquishing the artifices of words with the fame of thy life, thou didst transcend the boundaries of both. Wherefore, shining with most excellent virtue, thou hast acquired an immortal memory forever.

In thy valiant struggles thou didst show forth a most splendid episcopacy, O God-pleasing initiate of the mysteries of heaven, and by thy frequent banishments for preaching the Trinity thou didst drive out falsehood, for thou didst proclaim the triune God, crying out: Worship the Father, theologize the Son and hymn the Spirit for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn her who gave birth in the flesh to the One God in Trinity, and even after giving birth hath constantly remained whole, for she hath surpassed the cherubim and is more honorable than the seraphim, who cry: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

In thee hath a wellspring of wisdom flowed forth which is truly like a wave of the sea; and ever-flowing rivers of pious doctrines have issued forth from thy belly, as Christ foretold. For thy divinely eloquent words surpass in number the sands of the sea.

Shown forth as a wise pastor and teacher of the Church, O venerable Cyril, thou didst manifestly interpret the two Testaments; for, holding thy words to be an anchor and a paternal inheritance, it crieth out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

For the sake of the Word, the Author of all things Who became incarnate for our sake, O Cyril, thou didst teach the ineffable union which is indivisible and unconfused, and didst worship each equally, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* The Word Who of old was begotten of the Father without mother was born a second time of thee, without father, O most pure one; and though before He was incorporeal, He became incarnate in His loving-kindness, desiring to save those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of Saint Athanasius

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Thy life flashed like lightning, O father, and thy proclamation hath rolled forth on all like thunder which the sun illumineth; for thou didst truly have inspiration from heaven on high. Wherefore, the grave, the state of oblivion, hath not dimmed thy memory, O Athanasius.

Illumined now with the thrice-radiant light of the threefold Sun, thou dost emit splendid effulgence upon those who hymn thee, reflecting beams from on high, like a mirror doth those of the sun, O blessed one; and thou art given the remission for which thou dost ask, which is great and of surpassing dignity.

We who hymn thee beg thee earnestly: Pray thou for the Church, grant victory over heresies to our hierarchs, giving them might to defend the Orthodox Faith against heretics; and grant salvation to us and peace to the world on the day of thy commemoration, O Athanasius.

*Theotokion:* Without seed or carnal desire thou didst conceive the Word of God Who hath created all things, and thou gavest birth to Him without suffering the pangs of childbirth, O Virgin. Wherefore, confessing thee to be the Theotokos with tongue and heart, we magnify thee.

Canon of Saint Cyril

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Thou didst mightily cast down every ungodly uprising of Nestorius against Christ and His Mother, O Cyril: a duality of Sons and the confusion of essences by the Acephalites.

With the power of reason and the enlightenment of grace, O blessed one, thou didst theologize the consubstantial Trinity and the incarnate Son of God; and as a champion of the Theotokos, thou art now glorified in the highest.

From on high thou dost mercifully regard those who hymn thee, O father, granting victory to the Cross-bearers and exalting the horn of the Orthodox by thy prayers, illumining those who magnify thy memory.

*Theotokion:* O most holy Virgin Theotokos who wast born of a barren woman and gavest birth to Him Who by His will and gesture hath transformed all things: My heart, which is barren of godly virtues, do thou show forth as fruitful, that I may hymn thee, the most hymned one.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos; and Glory…, that of the saints—

Ye were shown to be most wise initiates of the mysteries and champions of the all-divine Trinity, O blessed Athanasius and Cyril revealed of God, casting down Arius, and with him Sabellius and Nestorius, and every other falsehood of wicked heresies with them, O holy hierarchs of the Lord.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most blessed Cyril, thou dost teach the faithful to speak of the Theotokos with boldness and to do her homage in truth, destroying the ungodly heresy of Nestorius.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and the following sticheron of the saints, in Tone III—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

In sacred manner let us praise with great laudation the sacred Athanasius and Cyril, our invincible intercessors; for, cutting down legions of heresies by the power of the all-holy Spirit, they raised up victories for Orthodoxy through all the world, piously reckoning the mystery of the Trinity in the peculiar properties of the Persons thereof, likewise acknowledging them as united without confusion in the identity of Their essence, and theologizing like the cherubim; and they ever pray for our souls.

Glory…, the composition of Germanus, in the same tone—

The much-suffering Athanasius, the great clarion of the truth, today calleth the Church to a banquet. O ye faithful, let us all meet in splendor for the solemnity of the good shepherd, honoring his sacred labors with hymns, that, through his supplications, we may receive great mercy from Christ God.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Of great faith…”—

Beholding Him Who was born of thee hanging upon the Tree, O most immaculate one, thou didst exclaim, crying: “O my Child most desired, whither hath set the luminous beauty of Thee Who hast adorned the human race?”

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of Saint Athanasius, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of Saint Cyril.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the church of the saints.

Epistle to the Hebrews §334 \[13:7-16\]

Brethren: Remember those who have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation: Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited those who have been occupied therein. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned outside the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered outside the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto Him outside the camp, bearing His reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Matthew §11 \[5:14-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you: Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

