The 19th Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Macarius the Egyptian

For This Day We Provide also the Service for St. Mark of Ephesus

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Desiring blessedness which passeth understanding, O wondrous one, thou didst consider abstinence to be food, poverty to be riches, nonacquisition to be true property, and humility to be glory; wherefore, thou hast received thy desires according to thine understanding, dwelling in the habitations of the saints, O Macarius. *Twice*

Steadfastly thou didst finish the course of asceticism, and didst keep the Faith; wherefore thou hast also received the crown of righteousness, O father, which Christ prepared for thee, granting rewards and bestowing honors and recompense for pangs, as is meet. Pray thou, O glorious one, that He bestow them upon us as well. *Twice*

Laying waste to thy body, thou didst reject every passionate attachment, O divinely wise one, embittering thy senses with mighty feats of abstinence and a harsh life, with the endurance of perils and the bearing of evil circumstances, for which thou hast received never-ending delight, everlasting food and ineffable joy. *Twice*

Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

Be glad, O Egypt, who hast budded forth such a citizen as Macarius amongst thy saints! For, lo! adorned with the wisdom of the Holy Spirit, he embodied every aspect of ascetic endeavor in his virtuous life. And, setting him before us as mediator, we ask that he entreat Christ, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokos, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord…”—

The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock nailed of His own will to the Tree, cried out, lamenting piteously: “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, desiring to leave me bereft of Thee, my most beloved Child?”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons and attained the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, O most immaculate Theotokos, thou didst cry out, lamenting maternally: “O my Son and my God, save those who hymn Thee with love!”

Troparion, in Tone I—

Thou wast shown to be a desert-dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker, O our God-bearing father Macarius. Having received heavenly gifts through fasting, vigil and prayer, thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who have recourse unto thee in faith. Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who worketh healings for all through thee!

AT MATINS

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria, with 8 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the saint, with 6 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “I glorify Macarius who is most excellent among ascetics”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Resplendent with light divine, and dwelling now with the angels, O father, by thy supplications save those who celebrate thy most sacred memory and cry out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Walking unerringly, O all-blessed one, thou didst reach the end of the path which leadeth to life, fleeing tumults, and thou didst put down the uprisings of the demons, crying out with joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Having mortified carnal-mindedness with ascetic struggles, O father, thou didst submit to the divine Spirit; and, guided by His divine power, thou didst cry out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Thou didst forsake all beautiful things, loving the eternal beauty which is in the house of the Lord, O father, where the sound is of those who keep pure festival, crying out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

*Theotokion:* Having conceived in thy womb the unoriginate Father’s timeless Son, Who became flesh for the sake of us men, thou didst ineffably give birth to Him under time; and, rejoicing, we cry out to Him: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Thou didst submit to the law of the Spirit, putting on His armor, O venerable one, and didst not subject thy will to the law of sin.

Directing thine understanding towards God on high, O God-bearer, thou didst forsake all things on earth, being unceasingly made light by the pangs of abstinence.

Having burst asunder the bonds of nature by thy supernatural and pure life, O God-bearer, thou didst receive the ability to do things which transcend nature.

That thou mightest converse with God in stillness, O blessed father, thou didst resolve to dwell in the desert, withdrawing from tumult.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to save man for his benefit, He Who loveth mankind made His abode within thy womb without being circumscribed, O Mother of God, in that He is our Benefactor.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The Lord truly set thee in the house of abstinence like a star which wandereth not, guiding the ends of the earth with light, O venerable Macarius, father of fathers.

Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Tried by the fire of abstinence like gold in the crucible, O wise one, thou wast shown to shine with great luster; for which cause thou hast passed over to the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, praising thee with faith, we cry out: Ask thou grace, mercy and the cleansing away of our transgressions, O father! *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

To the path of repentance guide us who have ever wandered away into the trackless wastes of evil and have angered the all-good Lord, O blessed Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place of God.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the Tree, cried out, weeping and exclaiming maternally: “How can I endure Thine abasement which is past recounting, as well as voluntary sufferings, O my Son, mine all-good God?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Through true asceticism thou didst straightway put off the old corrupt man and sinful passions, O father; and thou didst put on Christ, the new Man, O most honored one.

Thy life was shown to be most radiant, as a most excellent standard of every godly virtue, O father, in prayers and fasting, vigils and supplications to Christ, Who loveth mankind.

Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyelids, O divinely wise father, until thou didst make thyself a most beautiful abode for the Master Who seeth all things; and to Him thou didst cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

In thy youth thou didst show forth chastity, in old age, understanding, and throughout thy life, endurance and long-suffering, and love for all who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast brought life to dead men and hast raised up those who have fallen into corruption, O most pure one, having given birth to the Bestower of life, Who delivereth those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Extending the intelligence of thy soul, and directing thy senses, O wise and glorious one, thou becamest a most honored temple dedicated to God.

Setting at naught the machinations of the most perverse serpent, thou didst blunt his bitter wiles, ever setting thy soul firmly in divine law.

Thou didst adorn the three parts of thy soul, O venerable one, and, having made thy mind master, thou didst have Christ guiding thee to the path of heaven.

*Theotokion:* The Virgin gave birth to our all-pure God, Who hath appointed purity as the law for all and declareth the holiness of piety to all on earth.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Thou didst ardently love to dwell in the desert, O God-bearer, therein receiving God Who delivered thee and guarded thy steps.

Thou didst remain unshaken in asceticism, O divinely wise one, maintaining such strictness even to the end, and thereby thou hast manifestly been vouchsafed incorrupt delight.

Thou didst live an angelic life on earth, and hast received the dignity of the angels as is meet, standing before the God of all with the angels.

*Theotokion:* In thy womb, O Mother of God, thou didst conceive the Word of the unoriginate Father, Who for our sake immutably became man like us, and is known in two natures.

Kontakion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels…”—

Having in life reached the end of a blessed life with the choirs of the martyrs, thou dwellest in the land of the meek, as is meet, O God-bearing Macarius; and having populated the desert as it were a city, thou hast received from God the grace of miracles. Wherefore, we honor thee.

*Ikos:* As a zealous disciple of the God-bearing Anthony, O father, pliable as wax, thou didst truly receive the imprint of his every virtue and struggle. Wherefore, like Elijah to another Elisha, he imparted the grace of miracles in twofold measure to thee, who hast also received the effulgence of the foreknowledge of the truth. The great activity of thy life hath been established throughout the world, awakening those who sleep in the abyss of perdition. Wherefore, we honor thee.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Casting down the enemy with the help of God and assistance from on high, thou becamest a victor, crying: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having purged away the gloom which cometh from the passions, thou wast illumined with the enlightenment of dispassion, O blessed one, crying: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having adorned thy soul in magnificent virtues and become beautiful for God with comeliness, thou didst chant, rejoicing: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Making His abode within thy womb, O Virgin, the Lord Who loveth mankind, the blessed God of our fathers, became incarnate, calling us who had fallen into captivity, that we might become what we were in the beginning.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Receiving the words of eternal life in thy heart, O most blessed one, thou didst cause thy body to wither; and thou didst die to the world, clothing thyself in life-bearing mortality, and criest: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O God-bearer, entreat our only Benefactor, that He be merciful unto those who celebrate thy most sacred memory, asking remission of offenses for them. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Heeding God with constant inclination, and thus receiving the radiance of effulgence, like a mirror thou sendest forth luminous reflected light upon those who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ever advancing with divine ascents, thou didst mount the ladder which stretcheth up to the heavens, whereon the Lord had appeared, O father, until thou didst reach those who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O joyous one, for thou gavest birth for us to God incarnate. Wherefore, we all call thee the Theotokos, the God-receiving table, the beauty of Jacob, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Thou didst water the field of thy heart with tears of fasting; and, rejoicing, O God-bearing father, in joy thou now gatherest up the honors of thy struggles like sheaves. Wherefore, we all bless thee.

Never-waning light shone upon thee, and thou hast received everlasting gladness; and, as thou joinest chorus with the angels around the King and Lord, be thou mindful of those who celebrate thy memory with faith, O most blessed father.

Thou didst succeed in eluding the arrows of the demons and their wicked machinations; thy soul was saved, O blessed one, and stood forth, pure and undefiled, and thou hast been vouchsafed the inheritance of heaven. Wherefore, be thou mindful of those who hymn thee.

Thou didst contend according to the law of asceticism, as is meet, O father, and didst triumph. Wherefore, the only Benefactor hath honored thee with a crown of glory and vouchsafed unto thee divine effulgence and blessed delights.

*Theotokion:* As thou gavest birth to the Creator of all creatures, O Mother of God, thou hast surpassed every creature in divine glory, holiness and grace, and in the perfection of every virtue. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars…”—

Desiring the life of the angels, thou didst withdraw into the deserts; and having subdued the passions of the flesh, thou wast shown to be angelic, O our God-bearing father.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

By thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all of us, thy servants, unharmed by the attack of the enemies; for thee alone do we have as our refuge in need.

Aposticha stichera of the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone IV—

Thy good works have shone forth like the sun on earth and in heaven, O Macarius, favorite of Christ; for thou hast proclaimed to us the true and unadulterated Faith of Christ in Orthodox manner. Wherefore, pray thou, O venerable and God-bearing father, that He grant us great mercy on the day of thy commemoration.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, she who gave Thee birth lamented and cried out to Thee maternally: “O most desired Son, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How is it that Thy hands and feet have been pierced with nails by the iniquitous, O Word, and Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous things.

Epistle to the Galatians §213 \[5:22-6:2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, ­meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

