The 20th Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable & God-bearing Father Euthymius the Great

If the superior so desire, we celebrate a vigil.

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Soaring far above the circles of heaven in divine virtue, O most blessed father, thou didst descend into darkness; and thereby thou wast truly shown to receive effulgence, O venerable one, not in indistinct images, but in the grace of God. *Twice*

Having enlightened soul and mind with the virtues, thou didst pass over to the heavens, to the kingdom of Christ, O thrice blessed Euthymius, offering Him the most severe of thy pangs; and shining forth in ascetic endeavors like a lamp thou findest delight in the sustenance which waxeth not old.

The truly consubstantial and unoriginate Trinity, having established the abode of the Spirit within thee, showed thee to be a most radiant beacon, O God-bearing Euthymius; and having passed above all things which would drag thee down, thou hast found a dwelling-place in the heavens.

Glory…, in Tone II—

O venerable father, having diligently learned the virtues from childhood, thou becamest an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and receiving from Him the ability to work miracles, thou didst exhort men to spurn pleasures. And having been illumined now most purely with divine light, illumine thou our thoughts, O father Euthymius.

Now & ever…: Theotokion

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Fending off the delusions of the evil demons by the power of the Cross, O father Euthymius, thou didst shine forth the glory of Christ.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Like Elijah thou wast taken up in a fiery chariot, O blessed one, and thou standest directly before the Trinity, O all-comely Euthymius.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Bearing in thy hands the Cross of the Lord, O father Euthymius, thou didst utterly destroy demonic illusions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O Virgin, who hast received the Joy of the world, Christ, the Bestower of life, and brought an end the grief of our first mother.

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O father Euthymius, an angel of heaven was sent to announce beforehand the birth of thee who like John didst spring forth from the womb of a barren woman; for thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of him and a homeless one who spurned possessions, sharing his way of life, and, like the Baptist, sustaining thyself in the mountains, and shining forth with boundless miracles.

O father Euthymius, thou didst produce the fruit of barrenness, yet wast truly shown to have many children; for the desert, which before was trackless, became filled with monastics, thy spiritual seed. And now, make thou supplication, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

O father Euthymius, thy life was excellent and thy Faith truly Orthodox; for through activity thou didst attain unto the most exalted vision, becoming an abode of wisdom, worshipping Christ in two natures as One of the Trinity. Him do thou beseech in behalf of our souls.

O father Euthymius, sharing in the sufferings of Him Who was stretched out upon the Cross, through asceticism thou didst truly make thyself conformable to His resurrection and glory. Him do thou now entreat, that He grant to our souls peace and great mercy.

And 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

O thou who wast sanctified from thy mother’s womb, when the eye of Him Who seeth all things perceived thy purpose and inclination leading constantly toward those things which are higher, then, O most blessed one, declaring thee to be a God-given gift, the namesake of goodly courage, He freed thy parents from their sorrow. Wherefore, advancing from infancy, thou didst please God, our Benefactor. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

Finding thee to be like a clear mirror of divine revelations, Christ illumined thee with the radiant splendor of His light, O father who art full of gifts divine. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be a wellspring overflowing with healings and a feeder of the hungry, watering with rains the desire of the those who thirst; and, looking upon souls as pledges, O wise one, by thy discourse thou didst elevate them unto God. Him do thou entreat, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Shining forth with vision and activity, thy life was angelic, a standard and most excellent model of virtue for those who desire to worship God in perfection. And thy divinely wise discourse, O Euthymius, hath taught all to worship the Trinity, that Christ is known to be One in two natures, and that the councils were equal in number to the four Gospels of Christ. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.

Glory…, in Tone III—

Dedicated to God, like another Samuel, from thy mother’s womb, O father Euthymius, thou wast the namesake of the goodly courage for the faithful, the staff and confirmation of monastics, and the pure habitation of the Holy Spirit. Ask thou great mercy for us who honor thee.

Now & ever… Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

How can we not marvel at thy giving birth to the God-man, O all-honored one. For without having accepted the temptation of a man, O all-immaculate one, without a father thou gavest birth in the flesh to a Son Who was begotten without a mother before the ages, without His undergoing change, confusion or division, and yet preserved intact the character of both essences. Wherefore, O Virgin Mother and Mistress, entreat Him, that the souls of those who in Orthodox manner confess thee to be the Theotokos be saved.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple; and these stichera idiomela, in Tone II—

*The composition of Germanus:* “Be ye of good cheer,” the angel of the Lord said to thy parents, “for a child shall be born to you of the womb, the namesake of goodly courage!” And thou wast conceived in the womb, fulfilling the promise made to them, and wast nourished with prayer from earliest infancy, O father Euthymius.

*The composition of the Studite:* Having strengthened thy mind with divine understanding, O father Euthymius, thou didst traverse impassable wastes, in nowise amazed by the things of this earth. In tribulations thou didst show thyself to be most valiant and great in wisdom, and humble and meek in thine ascetic struggle and goodly courage. And thou didst manifestly sail across the raging sea of this present life, attaining unto the right tranquil haven. Entreat Christ, that He have mercy on our souls.

Thou didst spurn the things of this life, O father Euthymius, as one who desired the life on high; and thou didst disdain riches, clothing thyself in humility. Thou didst hate food and didst embrace abstinence; thou didst reject unrighteousness and didst pursue righteousness. Wherefore, O venerable father, in thy holy prayers to the Lord be thou mindful of us.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Thy good works shone forth like the sun on earth and in heaven, O Euthymius, favorite of Christ; for in Orthodox manner thou hast preached to us the true and unadulterated Faith of Christ. Wherefore, pray thou, O venerable and God-bearing father, that He grant us great mercy on the day of thy commemoration.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

Aposticha stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, O venerable father, in that thou art the cause of goodly cheer for the Church; for by thy nativity all the assaults of the heretics were repulsed by the providence of God. Wherefore, He called thee Euthymius, namesake of good courage. Thou didst fill the ranks of celestial beings with joy by the radiance of thy life, and now, making thine abode with them, filled with light and enjoying most blessed and divine effulgence, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Made steadfast by the staff of the Cross, thou didst dry up torrents of iniquity, and, noetically watered by the torrent of divine sweetness and the wellsprings of paradise, thou didst put forth springs of salvation in the desert. And irrigated with streams of the divine Spirit like a palm-tree, O venerable one, thou didst hasten to the heights of heaven, and didst show thyself to be a fiery pillar full of luminous effulgence, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our souls.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Truly thou hast passed over with joy and gladness of soul to the wondrous tabernacles, even unto the house of God, O most blessed father, where thou dost listen to the beautiful voices, the sweet hymnody and the ineffable delight of those who keep festival, sharing in their beauty, O Euthymius. And desiring this alone, thou didst mortify thy flesh, which thou didst attain, adorned with divine righteousness. Entreat Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.

Glory…, in the same tone—

O venerable father, thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst free soul and body from the passions, and didst prepare thyself as a dwelling-place for the Spirit; for Christ, coming with the Father, made His abode within thee. In that thou art a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity, O Euthymius our father, thou great preacher, pray in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, thou unassailable city, impregnable rampart, steadfast intercession and refuge of our souls.

After the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the saint, in Tone IV—

Rejoice, O desert who hast not given birth! Be of good cheer, O thou who hast not felt the pangs of travail! For the man of spiritual desires hath multiplied children for thee, planting them with piety and nurturing them with abstinence unto the perfection of the virtues. Through his supplications, O Christ God, bring peace to our life. *Twice*

And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: the resurrectional theotokion in the same tone—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Resplendent with unapproachable light, thou didst shine forth like a star in the desert places, illumining with thy teachings those who have approach thee with steadfast soul, O Euthymius. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Accepting the entreaty of us who have recourse to thy protection, O Virgin, never cease to make supplication to Him Who loveth mankind, that He save thy servants.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

Casting off the cares of life and embracing the angelic life, thou didst adorn thy soul with abstinence, and hast richly received grace from God, O God-bearing Euthymius. Pray thou in behalf of us who piously praise thee. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most holy Virgin, have mercy on us who with faith have recourse to thee, the compassionate one, and who ask thy fervent aid; for, as the good Mother of God Most High, O thou who art full of the grace of God, thou dost ever make entreaty with thy maternal supplications, that He save us all.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Euthymius, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Truly embracing the poverty of Him Who was born of the Virgin for our sake, thou didst reckon transitory things to be as grass, O blessed one; for, having tasted of the tree of knowledge, O venerable one, thou didst show thyself to be a godly instructor of monastics. Wherefore, thou didst raise them all up to zeal for the angelic life and to an understanding of the Faith, O standard-bearer Euthymius our father. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All of us, the generations of men, bless thee, the Virgin who alone among women gave birth without seed to God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, and with milk thou didst nourish the Creator and Lord as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and cry out to thee together: entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, §43

\[Mt. 11: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed legions of the demons and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our souls.

Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the venerable one, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is \(including the irmoi\): “Thou hast been shown to be the wealth of mortals, O Euthymius”, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* There is none like unto Thee, O all-glorious Lord; for with Thy mighty hand Thou didst deliver the people whom Thou hadst acquired, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Most gloriously thou didst loose the grief of thy parents, O namesake of goodly courage, having been promised to them by God as a gift before birth.

The Church giveth utterance to a hymn of thanksgiving, O venerable one, having received thee from God as an offspring of peaceful and goodly courage who wast foretold.

Canon II of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: By thy supplications, O most blessed one, grant me light”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

With thy supplications and entreaties beseech God; dispel the gloomy cloud of my despondency, O most blessed one, who, standing before the King of all, art full of good cheer and consolation.

Having been promised and given by God like a new Samuel, even before thou wast conceived, O venerable father, thou hast been revealed to all the Churches through the splendor of thy goodly courage, in accordance with thy name.

Having made supplication and entreaty to God, thy parents received thee as a divine gift and a radiant offspring, who by thy nativity declarest the splendor of piety and the rejection of heresy.

From childhood thou wast dedicated to God Who had given thee life, O venerable one; and, looking to Him and guided by His life-creating precepts, O God-bearer, by faith thou didst ascend to the uttermost summit of the virtues.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as our intercession, O Mother of God, we fear not the hordes of the enemy which assail those who glorify the God and Lord of all Who was born of thee. Him do thou entreat in our behalf.

*Katavasia:* The irmoi of the feast of the Meeting of the Lord.

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Emulating Hannah, she who gave thee birth brought thee, like the venerable Samuel of old, as a living sacrifice to God, Who had glorified thee even before thou wast conceived.

Aflame with rich love for God, O venerable one, with most pious resolve thou didst achieve mastery over the passions; wherefore, the grace of God rested upon thee.

Canon II

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Born of a barren woman, thou wast shown to be a most skillful husbandman of spiritual fertility, cutting down the weeds of impiety and scattering the divine seed of piety, O venerable one.

As a sacred minister of supernatural and mystic visions, O God-bearing father, by thy doctrines thou didst in godly manner lead unbelievers to Christ as believers instructed in higher things.

Having mortified the flesh by extreme asceticism, O Euthymius, holding fast to most chaste and pious thought, thou didst straightway prefer everlasting life and sweetness to things which are transitory and corrupt.

Eluding the fiery pursuit of the demons by a soul afire and wounded with the love of Christ, O father, thou wast illumined with dew-bearing grace, becoming a bearer of the sign of the Cross.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst seal the sayings of the prophets of God and their prophecies. Yea, thou didst fulfill all their divine utterances, O blessed and most immaculate one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Thou didst spiritually fill the lamp of thy soul with the oil of abstinence, yearning for the ever-radiant coming of thy Bridegroom, O venerable one. Thou didst keep watch with vigilant prayers and makest thine abode in His bridal chamber, O blessed one. Wherefore, as is meet, thou hast truly received delight and the ever-vital ability to perform miracles, O God-bearing Euthymius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Mistress, as is meet I offer thee thankful praise, like the widow’s two mites, for all thy gifts; for thou hast been shown to be my protection and help, ever rescuing me from perils and tribulations. Wherefore, delivered from those who oppress me as from the midst of a burning furnace, I cry out to thee from the depths of my heart: O Theotokos, help me, entreating Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto me, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* By Thy condescension Thou didst bow the heavens down in understanding, and didst reveal Thyself incarnate on earth. Wherefore we all cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having kept thine intelligence immutable, from earliest infancy thou didst show forth ascent unto God by thy way of life. And drawing nigh unto Him, thou didst ascend from power to power.

As a traveler from hence to the city which received God, thou didst desire the humility of Christ, and wast crucified in spirit with Him Who suffered on the Cross for thy sake.

It being thy will to contend lawfully, thou didst strip off thy life; and naked, wrestling like Christ against the enemy, thou didst raise high the trophy of victory in the desert.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Desiring undying glory, O father, thou didst consecrate thyself wholly unto God, and by thy blameless life, abstinence and the splendor of thy life, didst zealously hasten to Him, crying out unceasingly: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Loving the Wellspring of goodness with all thy strength, O venerable one, thou becamest a wellspring of divine gifts for ascetics, healing those who thirst for, like Moses of old, thou didst all-gloriously cause springs to gush forth in the desert.

Emerging from the hidden recesses of the Spirit, thou didst set free the children of the bondwoman Hagar, regenerating them as worthy children of God by the baptism of adoption; for, having emulated the life of the divine Forerunner, thou wast shown to be a baptist, O Euthymius.

Illumined by God with grace, O Euthymius, thou becamest known to the ignorant; for truly it did not befit thy virtue for thee to hide and conceal thyself in the deserts. Wherefore, the Master of all hath shown thee to all as a radiant lamp.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O honored one! Rejoice, O most pure Virgin! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed with grace! Rejoice, tabernacle! Rejoice, O ark! Rejoice, candlestand who bore the divine Light! For thou hast been for the faithful the mediatress of ineffable joy and gladness of soul.

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Thou didst submit to the law of God, for thou didst wield thy body like a spiritual weapon, O God-bearer, making the wisdom of thy flesh subject to thy spirit.

In gladness thou didst complete the course of this life, and, conceiving the fear of God within thyself, thou didst give birth unto salvation for the lost, shining like the sun though hidden by the desert.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Revealed as a pillar of fire and cloud by the radiance of the Spirit, O Euthymius, thou didst go on before the pious ascetics, leading them towards the heavenly path and to unperishing delight, guiding them to the heights of heaven, O father.

Christ hath given thee to the world, O father, as an exceeding merciful physician of the sick, an all-glorious feeder of the hungry, an instructor of the ignorant, a chastiser of the mindless, and a helper of orphans and the poor.

Thou wast compassionate and merciful, possessing a humble-minded character, O father, cutting off the roots of the passions with divine teachings, enlightening and instructing thy disciples, and healing the afflictions of men’s souls.

Emitting everywhere the rays of thy miracles, thou hast illumined all; like a magnet thou hast drawn all to thy teachings, edifying the traits and gifts of their souls, surpassing all in purity of soul.

*Theotokion:* We all proclaim thee to be the true Theotokos, O thou who art blessed of God, having been delivered from corrupt birth by thy birthgiving and recalled to a better life, through the loving-kindness of the mercy of our God.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

By thy supplications, O God-bearer, break thou the yoke of our bondage, having now through the laver of regeneration adopted the descendants of the bondwoman of old.

The grace of God, O God-bearer, which actively dwelt within thee, appointed thee an all-wise founder, a chastiser of the mindless and an expeller of evil spirits.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Receiving from God authority most great, thou didst drive away multitudes of adverse demons, healing of deformity all who with faith had recourse to thee.

Truly blessed wast thou, O venerable father Euthymius, having acquired enriching poverty and tears of joy; for thereby thou didst inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Thou didst spurn quickly fading honor and glory on earth, O most blessed one, and hast received everlasting life and incorrupt delight, having made thine abode most excellently in the mansions of heaven.

*Theotokion:* We call thee the Lady and Mistress of all; for truly thou didst ineffably give birth unto God Who created, sustaineth and embraceth all, O most immaculate one.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As firstfruits…”—

Creation found joy in thine honored nativity and in thy divine memory, O venerable one, receiving the goodly cheer of thy many miracles. Give richly of them to our souls, and wash away the defilement of our sins, that we may chant: Alleluia!

*Ikos:* How can I, wretch that I am, offer praise from my slothful heart? I am filled with fear when I hymn the great Euthymius. Yet, trusting in his entreaties, I begin a hymn with goodly courage and great diligence, and recount to all his life and birth, and how his parents chanted unto God: Alleluia!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Thou wast seen within a cloud, O father, enveloped by a supernatural fire, crying out, as a heavenly initiate of the mysteries of God: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

The Creator of nature hath freely given thee supernatural powers, O father, for as a divine initiate of the mysteries of heaven, thou didst cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Worshipping the one Only-begotten, One in two natures according to His divine incarnation, O Euthymius, thou didst cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Uniting thyself with the incorporeal ones through extreme abstinence, O father Euthymius, thou didst show thy life to be a contest of asceticism and an exercise in holiness, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Christ showed thee to be a two-edged sword hewing down hordes of the demons and piercing the hearts of the enemy, but making glad the souls of those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Filled with the light of the threefold Sun, O father Euthymius, through communion thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary reflecting the primal Light, emitting rays upon those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Thou didst shine like the dawn, having within thee the Sun of righteousness, Who cleanseth the world of the darkness of ignorance with the radiance of divine knowledge. To Him do we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having dedicated thyself to God and kindled the furnace of the conscience, O Euthymius, rejoicing thou didst set fire to thy whole self, thy life, as an unblemished sacrifice, chanting unto Christ: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having become a son by adoption through the grace of God, as an inheritance thou didst receive knowledge of things to come; for, mastering thy nature, thou didst transcend nature in thy foreknowledge, hastening to fulfillment, O Euthymius. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having acquired a most mighty way of life, O most blessed one, thou didst attain unto the most exalted vision, becoming the receptacle containing the life-creating Spirit and the gifts which richly flow from Him; and thou chantest unceasingly: Ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

Moving thy residence, thou didst reach the outer limits of Sion; and thou didst attain unto the everlasting mansions, obtaining a heavenly inheritance by thy pangs. And thou chantest with the angelic choirs: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

As radiant as the sun, thou didst illumine the desert places, didst expel the dark-visaged demons and becamest a most brilliant pillar which reached up to the heights of heaven, shining with the effulgence of miracles, and unceasingly crying out to the Master: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Adorned with the most sacred activities of thy life, thou didst set forth the most basic virtue, becoming radiant through the correctness of thy doctrines and giving utterance to excellent theology, crying out unceasingly: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Bride of God, from captivity by the passions do thou rescue those who have recourse unto thee; and grant full freedom, O Mistress, to the churches of the Orthodox, who chant with faith: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* O all-pure one, all creation proclaimeth thee as pure during thy birthgiving, before giving birth and after giving birth. And we magnify thee as the true Theotokos.

Finding thee reposing whole in thy shrine, O venerable one, we bless thee as a victorious athlete, who wast a wellspring of healings even before thy death.

He Who dwelleth in the highest hath made thee an ally for our earthly rulers against the barbarians, and for thy flock against divers temptations, O venerable father.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Christ told thee of thy much-loved departure unto Him, O father, as He did of old to Moses the God-seer, whose emulator thou hadst become through virtue; and thou didst part the sea of the passions and didst pass over unhindered to the promised land, vanquishing the adversary.

Thou didst repose like Elijah the zealot, ascending to the heavens on a chariot of the virtues, O venerable one, where thy manner of life was manifestly recorded; and, standing now before the Master, be thou mindful of those who with faith celebrate thy luminous and most sacred memory.

Thy manner of life was angelic and thy life was all-luminous, O most blessed and divinely wise one; thy soul was most radiantly godly, and thy faith pious; for thou wast giving utterance to divine dogmas, O God-bearer, and wast shown to be a preacher of Orthodox doctrine.

Made steadfast by thy supplication, O divinely wise father, I earnestly set my hope on thee, mine advocate and intercessor, who prayest to God, who dost ask forgiveness of sins and the termination of my debts, and obtaineth divine compassions.

*Theotokion:* Be thou a tower of salvation for me, O pure one, repelling the hordes of the demons and driving away the tumult of temptations and tribulations, repulsing the assault of the passions, bestowing pure freedom, and granting an abundance of the gifts of God.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

God sanctified thee from thy mother’s womb, O venerable father, showing thee to be a divine prophet, like unto Jeremiah and Samuel of old. With them, O wonder-working and God-bearing Euthymius, who dwellest with the angels, be thou mindful of those who hymn thee with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Saved because of thee, O Mistress, in lordly manner we confess thee to be the Theotokos; for thou didst ineffably give birth to God, Who destroyed death by the Cross and hath drawn to Himself the assemblies of the venerable. With them we praise thee, O Virgin.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O venerable father Euthymius, having forsaken that which is on earth, thou didst follow after Christ; and thou didst not prefer corruptible things to things which are to come, O glorious one. Dwelling in the desert as in a city, thou didst destroy hordes of the demons. O ever-glorious one, who can help but recount thy soul’s true zeal for the Lord? *Twice*

O venerable father Euthymius, thou wast shown to be a rule for monastics and their boast, the delight of the Orthodox, and a radiant beacon for the whole world; for thou wast not afraid of the terrors of the deceitful enemy when thou didst dwell in the cave. O the gifts replete in thee, O blessed one, whereby thou didst manifestly trample underfoot all the arrogance of the demons!

O venerable father Euthymius, thou didst truly take wing, soaring aloft unto God, O holy one; and, having purified thy senses by fasting and unceasing supplications, O most blessed one, thou wast counted worthy of immortal life. O all-glorious adornment of ascetics, Christ hath received thee, rejoicing, into the immaterial mansions.

Glory…, in the same tone—

We honor thee, O Euthymius our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; for by following thy steps have we truly come to learn how to walk aright. Blessed art thou, for, having labored for Christ, thou didst put down the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them do thou entreat the Lord, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the saint, and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 335 \[13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Luke, § 24 \[6: 17-23\]

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

