The 21st Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Maximus the Confessor & of the Holy Martyr Neophytus

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs Eugene, Candius, Valerian & Aquila

For this Day We Provide also the Services for St. Agnes and St. Maximus the Greek

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

O venerable Maximus, thou didst preach Him Who, in His loving-kindness, became man in His good pleasure, Who is known as having two wills and activities; and thou hast stopped the gaping mouths of the abominable ones who, at the temptation of the devil, the author of evil, worship Him as having a single will and activity.

With the cords of thy doctrines, O father Maximus, thou didst strangle Pyrrhus, the evil-minded trifler, and didst endure persecution and tribulations, O ever-memorable one, cruelly wounded, thy tongue cut off, and the divine hand, which is ever stretched forth to God, writing wherewith thou hast wrought exalted words.

O blessed one, thy tongue was holy, sharpened by the Spirit like the pen of scribe, writing the law of the divine virtues with comely letters of grace upon the tablets of our hearts and imparting by thy doctrine the incarnation for men, in two essences, of Him Who desired to appeared in a single Hypostasis.

And 3 stichera of the martyr Neophytus, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O all-glorious wonder! The dove which came from on high converseth with the martyr Neophytus in human speech! Wherefore, he is resplendent with the angelic life wherein he suffered mightily, though but a youth. O the godly works of the martyr tortured in five ways! By his supplications save our souls, O Christ, in that Thou art compassionate.

O all-glorious wonder! Neophytus of perfect wisdom, from earliest infancy performeth miracles through the activity of the Spirit: by his entreaties he causeth water to pour forth from a rock, and raiseth up the dead woman, whose offspring he was. O the godly works of the martyr tortured in five ways! By his supplications save our souls, O Christ, in that Thou art compassionate.

O all-glorious wonder! the thrice-blessed Neophytus suffered for Christ, put to fright the enemy with his excellent visions, quenched the fire when he was cast therein, and showeth savage beasts to be terrified. O the invincible might wherein the athlete causeth all to marvel! By his supplications save us, O God!

Glory…, of the venerable one, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ, ask peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

The unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate Mistress, when, of old, she beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried out: “O my Child most sweet, what new and most strange sight is this that I see? How hath the thankless synagogue betrayed Thee to be tried by Pilate and condemned Thee to death, Who art the Life of all? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Maximus our father; for by thy steps have we truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, serving Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them beseech the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

“What is this sight that I see, which mine eyes behold, O Master? Dost Thou who sustainest all creation die, suspended upon the Tree, granting life unto all?” the Theotokos said, weeping, when she beheld upon the Cross the God and man Who had shone forth ineffably from her.

Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

O instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon of all the world, divinely inspired adornment of monastics: O all-wise Maximus, by thy doctrines thou hast enlightened all. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…: Troparion of the martyr Neophytus, in Tone IV—

In his sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyr Neophytus received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God. For, possessed of Thy might, he set at naught the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls!

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

AT COMPLINE

Canon of the Martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the four victorious martyrs”, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the impassable, uncommon path of the sea dryshod, Israel the chosen cried aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for He hath been glorified!

Illumined with the radiance of the grace of the threefold Sun, O glorious martyrs, enlighten those who hymn your most honored memory, delivering them from sufferings and evil circumstances.

Enlightened by the most Holy Spirit, O wise and glorious martyrs, having left behind the tempest of the world, ye withdrew into the mountains, and, having trained for the divine contest, ye finished it splendidly.

Made steadfast by the might of the Creator and His omnipotent power, O godly martyrs, ye showed yourselves to be unmoved by the manifold storms which assailed you during your tortures, and trampled all the power of the enemy underfoot.

*Theotokion:* Vouchsafe that, through thine intercessions, I may be counted worthy to receive divine mercy, O blessed Mistress who gavest birth in the flesh to the most merciful Word, Who is readily placated and accepteth those who have recourse unto Him.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Wounded by the love of the Master, ye endured multifarious tortures; for, scourged savagely with thongs of hide and cruelly burned by fire withal, ye remained unshaken, O athletes.

Strengthened by the power of the Lord, ye went forth to do battle with the enemy and cast him down, O athletes, crying out to Christ: Thou art our God, and there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Dancing with the angels in the highest, and united with the assemblies of the martyrs, with them pray that those who honor you may be delivered from all tribulation and evil circumstance, O divine martyrs.

*Theotokion:* Together we hymn thee, O most lauded one, through whom the never-waning Light hath ineffably shone forth upon us; and we cry out: Save thy servants from all oppression, for thou art the helper of the faithful!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

Chanting piously, let us honor the boldness of Eugene, the valor of Aquila and the endurance of Candius, likewise honoring with them the might of Valerian.

The tyrant, stuck fast in savagery, commanded that they beat thee without mercy, who wast being pulled apart by ropes, O Eugene, and that they lacerate thee withal with an iron implement, and burn thy body with torches.

The mindless tyrant, intent upon breaking your steadfastness with tortures, subjected you to torments yet more bitter, O wise martyrs; but by the grace of Christ the Creator of all, ye put him to shame.

*Theotokion:* As thou art the only help of the faithful, O most blessed Theotokos, from all tribulations deliver thy servants who with fervor call thee blessed and have recourse to thy divine protection.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ my Savior, enlightenment of those who lie in darkness and salvation of the despairing: rising early unto Thee, O King of the world, may I be enlightened by Thy radiance, for I know none other God than Thee.

Truly showing forth a martyr’s patience, thou didst stand firm as adamant, O martyr Eugene, enduring bitter torments and crying out to the Creator with thanksgiving: We know none other God than Thee!

By thy most sacred supplications to the Creator thou didst commit the gods of the idolaters to oblivion, O martyr Eugene; and didst endure multifarious tortures, thy whole body pitilessly beaten with staves.

*Theotokion:* Deliver us from all harm, O most holy Virgin; for thou art the intercessor for us who cry out to thy divine Offspring: We know none other God than Thee!

Ode VI

*Irmos:* From the belly of the sea monster, Jonah cried out: Lead me up from the abyss of hell, I pray, that with a spirit of truth and in a voice of praise I may sacrifice to Thee, as to my Deliverer!

Stretched out on a tree and lacerated with iron implements, their shoulders mercilessly cut by scourges and burned with fire through the wrath of judge, the right victorious martyrs rejoiced.

O glorious Eugene, thou didst endure for thy body to be burnt with torches, stretched out upon a tree, and salt poured mercilessly into thy wounds through the cruelty of the iniquitous tyrant.

*Theotokion:* May we who have recourse to thy protection be delivered from every attack and sorrow, O divinely joyous one, for we ever piously glorify thee as the most immaculate Mother of God.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Resplendent with beauty, the four steadfast martyrs have illumined the four ends of the earth with their martyric sufferings and power, as with rays of light; and among them the great Eugene shineth forth most splendidly.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

With splendid struggles thou didst array thyself against falsehood, O Eugene, and, becoming a victor through thy godly stance, thou hast found the reward of thy labors and chantest with the angels: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having the Cross of Christ as a divine weapon, O athletes, together ye brought to naught the host of the devil and the efforts of the torturers, receiving crowns of victory from the life-bearing right hand of God, the Judge of the contest.

In thy purity of mind thou wast not shaken by the assaults of tortures, O Eugene, but, beaten continually with staves, thou didst most excellently cut off the heads of thine invisible opponents and foes with the opposition of thy sufferings.

*Theotokion:* Behold, as thou didst foretell, O most pure one, all of us, the generations of men, call thee blessed, as is meet, and fittingly glorify thee; for thou gavest birth to the Word Who with the Father is equally without beginning, that, incarnate of thee, He might save mankind.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Valerian, and with him the glorious Aquila and the godly Eugene, together with Candius, the valiant athlete, opposed every evil devising of the persecutors.

Now hath dawned the divinely radiant memorial of the wondrous athletes Valerian, Eugene, Candius and the godly Aquila, which we celebrate with joy and love.

Shining radiantly upon us with beams of splendor, the yearly commemoration hath dawned of the athletes of Christ, the godly Aquila, with Candius, Eugene and Valerian.

*Theotokion:* In latter years, O pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock, the Son, Who is equally everlasting and unoriginate with the Father, issued forth from thee to save us. Him do thou never cease to entreat, moving Him to have mercy upon us.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Thou didst repel the assault of the tyrants, most gloriously passing over to God after many torments, receiving the honors of victory as a valiant warrior, a great champion, a chosen soldier of Christ, O most excellent Eugene.

Having joined the angels’ choirs, the assemblies of the martyrs and the ranks of the righteous, O martyrs, with them pray now that we who hymn you may be given cleansing of our sins and deliverance from all tribulations.

O divinely wise Eugene, most glorious martyr Aquila, Valerian, and your fellow athlete Candius, earnestly entreat the all-good Christ in behalf of us who piously celebrate your splendid memorial.

*Theotokion:* The multitudes of the angels and all the generations of men most joyously call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin; for thou gavest birth to the Savior, our Creator, Master and God. Him do thou entreat in our behalf.

Stichera of the martyrs, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

With hymns, O ye faithful, let us truly praise the divine warriors and athletes of Christ: the wise Eugene and Valerian, the glorious athlete Candius, together with Aquila, blessing them with faith as ones who suffered strangely, that they might rescue us from torment at the hour of sentencing.

O martyred athlete of Christ, thy body shot through with arrows, thou wast grievously broken by the wrath of the tyrant, mercilessly scorched with fire, beaten, burned with torches, thy wounds rubbed with salt and vinegar. Yet thou didst endure all these for the sake of the Lord, O blessed martyr Eugene.

Having the law of salvation manifestly in thy heart, thou didst withdraw from the world, O martyr, and didst betake thyself to the mountains, training thyself for the divine contest which thou didst truly finish, And joyously taking it up, thou didst endure the breaking of thy whole body and most cruel burning with fire, O blessed martyr Valerian.

Glory…, Now & ever… Theotokion—

All creation crieth out to thee: “Rejoice! Rejoice, O most holy Virgin! Rejoice, thou scepter of David! Rejoice, thou who gavest rise to the mystic Grape! Rejoice, O portal of heaven and bush unburnt! Rejoice, thou light of the universe! Rejoice, joy of all! Rejoice, rejoice, thou aid of those who flee to thy help in purity, O most immaculate one!”

Stavrotheotokion—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb led of His own will to the slaughter as a man, she said, weeping: “Dost Thou hasten now to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? What is this that Thou hast done, O Deliverer of all? Yet will I hymn and glorify Thine utter goodness which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia; and two for the saints, each with 4 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Venerable One, the acrostic whereof is, excluding the theotokia: “Let the most magnificent Maximus be glorified!”, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant to the Lord Who led His people across the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

O divine Maximus, from thy tongue flowing with sweet honey let fall all the grace of the Spirit upon me.

Thou didst show thyself to be a fire burning up heresy, O blessed one; for with the zeal of the Spirit thou didst purge it.

The irrational doctrine of monothelitism proceeded from a most wicked volition, O father, but it was denounced by thy words.

*Theotokion:* The never-waning Light, Whose good pleasure it was to be born of thy womb, O Bride of God, is all desire and sweetness.

Canon of the Martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thee, O martyr, thou new garden of Christ”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Traversing the water as though it were dry land, and escaping the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Knowing thee to be a new plant of Christ which blossomed forth in the garden of martyrdom and put forth the sacred fruits of piety, O most blessed Neophytus, we hymn thee.

Showing thyself to be a doer of the words of God from childhood, O blessed one, thou didst wisely choose the good portion and wast a guide for the lost.

When thou wast a child, desiring to see Christ Who for our sake became a babe in the flesh through the Virgin, thou didst bring the understanding of children to perfection.

Letting drop the sweetness of the knowledge of God from thy sacred mouth, O divinely wise one, with honor thou didst sweeten souls which had been bewitched by the malice of the alien.

*Theotokion:* O thou who gavest birth by nature to the Creator, thou hast deified all of human nature. Wherefore, we confess thee to be the true Theotokos, O Virgin Bride of God.

Ode III

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted. And my spirit doth hymn Thee.

By the shedding of his blood, Maximus most great truly showed himself to be a martyr and preacher of the pious Christian Faith.

O blessed Maximus, through fasting thou didst become a pure dwelling-place of philosophy, meet for God.

Thy tongue, O right honorable and most blessed Maximus, thou nurturer of wisdom, poured forth a river of Christian doctrines.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst make Thine abode in the womb of the most holy one, in most holy manner, O Master, and Thou showest us the path which leadeth to holiness.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

The pure Spirit preserved thee unharmed, who offered thyself wholly to the most compassionate Word, O glorious one.

Seeing the resurrection from the dead of her who had given thee birth, which thou didst perform, O martyr, multitudes of the faithful hymned the Lord.

The dove radiant with light called thee with a human voice to the paths of salvation, O Neophytus.

*Theotokion:* Having received immortality for thy sake, O Mother of God, the human race ever offereth thee joyous hymnody.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To the chosen leader…”—

With fitting hymns, O ye faithful, let us honor the great Maximus, the lover of the Trinity, who manifestly teacheth us the divine Faith, to worship Christ in two natures, volitions and activities; and let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O preacher of the Faith!

Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

Having suffered persecution for the Faith, O father, thou didst drive away all heresy; and, thy hand and tongue cut off, O blessed Maximus, thou hast received from the hand of the Creator the magnificent crown of confession. Him do thou now unceasingly entreat, that our souls find mercy.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross…”—

Thou didst spring forth in the gardens of Christ’s athletes like a newly flourishing tree, O glorious Neophytus, and didst put forth the fruits of divine understanding, in which those who honor thee with faith find nourishment, O athlete right wise. By thy supplication ever save us, interceding before God.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Fleeing to thy divine protection after God, O Theotokos, I pray, falling down: Have mercy, O all-pure one, for my sins have gone over my head, and I fear and tremble before the torments to come, O Mistress. O pure one, make entreaty to thy Son, that He deliver me from them.

Stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter times gave birth to Thee in the flesh, O Christ Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, when she saw Thee hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! How is it that Thou Who art worshipped as God by the angels art now crucified by iniquitous men? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Lord; I have understood Thy works and have glorified Thy divinity.

Mortals honor thee, and the ranks of heaven marvel; for through love of wisdom thou didst show thyself to be like one of the incorporeal beings, O father.

Savage was the tyrant, yet thy patience was unshakable. Wherefore, thou hast been called blessed, but the most wicked one hath been cast out.

Thy two all-blessed disciples suffered with thee, O Maximus, sharing thy sufferings. Wherefore, they have received equal honors.

Watered by the torrents of thy blood, O venerable one, through thy doctrine the Church of Christ giveth rise to the divine seed of the Tradition of the fathers.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the debt of sin by thy birthgiving, O most immaculate Bride of God, we send up joyous hymnody to thee.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos: Same as that of the preceding canon.*

A great multitude, beholding thy blameless life and undaunted reason, turned to God, O glorious martyr.

Guided by the divine Spirit, thou didst reach the mountain and there didst make thine abode, O blessed one; and, fed by an angel, thou didst show thyself to be a peer of the angels.

In sympathy thou didst distribute what thou hadst to the poor, as is commanded, O blessed one, receiving the reward which never passeth not away.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, thou gavest birth to Him Who, in the richness of His goodness, willingly impoverished Himself and hath taken pity on our lowliness.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Rising early at dawn, we cry out to Thee: O Lord, save us! For Thou art our God, and we know none other God than Thee.

Having acquired the knowledge of men and angels, Maximus hath justly been called a philosopher.

With boundless desire for wisdom, thou didst show thyself to be a most excellent emulator of thy Christ, O glorious Maximus.

Thou wast driven out by the rage of the tyrant, O blessed one, but didst find consolation in Christ.

*Theotokion:* Let those who did not acknowledge thee as the Theotokos never see the light of Him Who was born of thee, O all-pure Mother of God.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face away from me, O never-waning Light? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? Yet turn me and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Replete with ineffable mysteries, O right wondrous martyr Neophytus, thou didst depart to the impending contest of the struggles of martyrdom, undaunted by tortures or death.

By the ineffable providence of Him Who directed thy steps, the divine angels, appearing before thee, led thee from the mountain to thy contest, and, like another Moses, thy face was glorified with divine radiance.

Having the living Word in thy heart, O most glorious martyr Neophytus, with boldness of mind thou didst cry out to the persecutors: “I have come of my own, and not because ye sought me, but that I may denounce the weakness of your religion!”

*Theotokion:* The divine mystery which was hidden from before all the ages hath been made known to the ends of the world through thee, O most immaculate Virgin Maiden: the Son and Word of God Who became flesh and hath deified man.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O most merciful Christ our God, Who clothest Thyself in light as in a garment.

Unceasingly dost thou offer entreaty unto God, O divinely wise one, that He deliver me from the passions, spiritual and bodily, and from corruption.

All the turgid spring of heresies hath been dried up, O glorious Maximus, stopped by the sound of thy tongue.

Cleanse me, O Christ Who alone art good, and by the supplications of Thy venerable one pour forth upon my heart a wellspring of grace.

*Theotokion:* Thy Son, O most pure one, Who is comely beyond all the sons of men in the beauty of His divinity, became flesh for our sake.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I shall pour forth supplication unto the Lord, and to Him shall I declare my grief; for my soul hath been filled with evils, and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell. And like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Lifted up upon a tree, O most blessed one, thou wast mercilessly lacerated with iron implements; but thou didst break the stony heart of the deceiver who commanded thee to sacrifice to the gods and to deny our immortal God.

Torn apart and dragged along, O martyr, thou didst utterly bind falsehood; by the power of the Spirit thou didst show the onslaught of the enemy to be of no effect and didst hasten to heaven, to stand, crowned, before the Lord.

Exulting in the beauties of the Master, thou didst cleave unto Him, crying: “O Word of God, I willingly sacrifice myself for the sake of Thee Who sacrificed Thyself, most manifestly emulating Thine honored and divine sufferings!”

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou wast shown to be the all-radiant throne of the King of heaven, wherein, of His own will, He rested in the flesh, taking away our great debt. And He hath sat man upon the throne of the Father, as was His good pleasure.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling the dispensation concerning us…”—

The thrice-radiant light which abode in thy soul showed thee forth as a chosen vessel, O most blessed one, revealing things divine to the ends of the earth. O blessed Maximus, recount understanding of things hard to comprehend and manifestly preach to all the transcendent and unoriginate Trinity!

*Ikos:* Having shown thyself to be an emulator of the sufferings of Christ, and having Him in thy soul, O most blessed one who art most rich, thou didst appoint ascents in thy heart; and He granted thee grace from heaven. Thou didst manfully oppose the tyrants, O wise one, preaching the divine Trinity which is One in essence, and denouncing the heretics who fought against God. Thou didst endure countless trials, O most lauded and venerable one, and the severing of thy tongue and hand, yet didst not cease to speak with boldness and make steadfast the faithful by thy divine teachings, manifestly preaching to all the people the transcendent and unoriginate Trinity.

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children who went down from Judæa trampled the flame of the furnace underfoot by their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst speak of one essence, one will, one activity of the Trinity, and didst preach God incarnate in two natures, wills and activity. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst not preach two separate wills, which is contrary to reason and lacking in substance, O father, but madest a distinction in essences. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Holding thy divine words to be a pillar of Orthodoxy, O father, we worship One of the Trinity in two essences and wills. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Bearing the little Babe Who is God from before time began and was incarnate of thee, O most immaculate one, never cease to pray that He save those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trampled the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

The all-iniquitous one, making a furnace of living flame, enclosed thee in it for three days; yet thou wast in nowise consumed, O Neophytus, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Standing in the midst of the flame, O blessed martyr, thou didst all-gloriously delight in hymnody, for the dew of God cooled thee, who cried out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Every mind doth marvel at the magnificent miracle wrought in thee, O divinely wise one, for the fire in nowise burnt thee, but, pouring forth, consumed those who are inheritors of fire.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the angels, O pure Theotokos, having given birth to the Angel of Great Counsel, to Whom we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* As vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame through Thy grace, the children cried out, adhering greatly to Thy commandments: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Greatly loving Him Who hath loved the human race exceedingly, thou didst take up thy cross and wast crucified with Him, O blessed one, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!

Recoiling from every deadly pleasure, O blessed one, thou didst make thyself a divine mirror of great clarity, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Receiving life-bearing radiance from the one Godhead in three Hypostases, thou wast shown to be a sun to those lost in darkness, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee to be the Mother and Bearer of God our Life, O Theotokos, we all bless thee with Orthodox faith, theologizing together concerning thy birthgiving and exalting thee supremely forever, O pure one.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, seeing them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With thy young body and thy perfect intellect thou didst set at naught the malice of the author of evil, O most comely scion springing forth in the courts of Him Who grew from the root of Jesse; and thou didst cry out to Him unceasingly: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In the arena the wild beasts were afraid of thee, like the sacred Daniel of old; for they recognized thee as a witness to the sufferings of Christ. Confessing Him, thou didst endure unbearable tortures, crying out: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The immense lion, who had come to know thee on the mountain, O athlete Neophytus, was brought into the arena and during thine ordeal was loosed upon thee, who wast bound; but, recognizing thee, he bowed down before thee with fear, constrained by shame and reverently shedding streams of tears with compunction, O blessed of God.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the new Babe Who was ineffably begotten of the Father before all creation, O most pure one. Him do thou beseech, that He now restore me who am grown old through transgressions and cry out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Ever-virgin, which was revealed on the mountain to the law-giver in the fire and the bush, unto the salvation of us, the faithful, let us magnify with unceasing hymns.

O most blessed and all-great Maximus, thy blood, like that of Abel, proclaimeth with a clear voice the divinely inspired dogmas to the Church of Christ forever.

Thy hand was cut off, yet, by the finger of God, using as pen and ink thy severed tongue and thy precious blood, it writeth the Orthodox Faith on the hearts of the faithful.

Thou hast taken thy place before the throne of God with the martyrs whose zeal and faith thou didst share, O father. Make us to be the Master’s own and render us thine emulators.

*Theotokion:* Thou art our sword and bulwark, O Theotokos; thou art the help of those who have recourse to thee. Thee do we now appoint to make entreaty, that we may be delivered from our enemies.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Every ear is stricken with awe to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down to assume the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore, let us magnify the all-pure Theotokos, O ye faithful.

Thou didst stand before the cruel tormenters who would slay thee, O martyr Neophytus, like a lamb led voluntarily to the slaughter; and when thy side with pierced by a spear, thou didst receive a blessed end, O most valiant athlete of Christ.

O blessed one, thou didst offer thyself to God as a sacrifice, as a comely lamb, as an honorable immolation, as an offering of the holy temple, as pure holocaust, as a chosen bird, as a bullock of great value, as a new tree of paradise.

Thy manner of suffering was like to that of Him Who, in His goodness, suffered for our sake, O martyr, and through a similar spear thou didst truly achieve glory and dwellest now in the heavens, adorned with a diadem of victory and filled with incomparable joy.

*Theotokion:* Bearing as with tongs the burning Coal of heaven Who consumeth all the tinder of my heart’s passions, O Theotokos, deliver me from the fire of Gehenna, I pray, that I may glorify thee, the hope of the faithful, O most immaculate one.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable…”—

Thou didst show thyself to be the clarion of wisdom, affrighting the legions of the adversary with thy brilliant tongue, O Maximus, thou light of monastics. Wherefore, nurtured by thy words, we acknowledge the sense thereof.

Theotokion—

O Virgin Theotokos, thou hast shone forth the Deliverer and Master as the Light of noetic gladness in the world. Wherefore, pray thou that He may illumine the eyes of my soul with the light of divine radiance.

AT LITURGY

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 330

\[Heb. 11: 33-40\]

Brethren: All the saints through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; \(of whom the world was not worthy:\) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Luke, § 64 \[Lk. 12: 8-12\]

The Lord said: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: But he who denieth Me before men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him who blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

