The 22nd Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of the Holy Apostle Timothy

& of the Venerable Martyr Anastasius the Persian

The Service for the New-Martyrs of Russia, which follows, May Fall as Early as This Day

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 of the apostle, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most praised martyrs…”—

Manifestly illumined by the rays of the Spirit, O divinely revealed Timothy, thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon, passing over all the earth and enlightening it with grace. Pray thou now, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy.

O divinely wise Timothy, thou didst drink of the torrent of sweetness and, emulating Christ, with godly wisdom hast given drink to those who fervently desire the understanding of God. To Him hast thou now joyously departed, contemplating the all-radiant glory and infinitely powerful peace of the Trinity.

Placing thyself in submission to Paul, conversing with the Spirit through writing, thou becamest wholly radiant in light, a generous husbandman, and an earnest favorite of the Lord, living in chastity and piety, O divinely wise Timothy; and thou hast been vouchsafed crowns of victory as a lawful athlete.

And 3 stichera of the venerable martyr, in the same tone & melody—

O most blessed Anastasius, thou boast of the martyrs, who achieved splendid victories over falsehood, thou bearest in thy name a standard of fame, being borne aloft everywhere as a steadfast victor. And now raise thou up from sinful falls those who honor thy memory with faith.

O martyr Anastasius, achieving a splendid victory over falsehood, thou didst receive a twofold crown for thine ascetic struggle and thy steadfast contest, and thine opposition, even unto death. And Christ the Master hath given thee the gift of working miracles, as is meet.

The ends of the world now hymn thy wonders, O wonder-worker Anastasius; for Christ hath adorned thee, rewarding with miracles thee who endured tortures for His sake; and since thy death thou hast been counted worthy of immortal glory and blessedness.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Chosen by God before to be the disciple of the wise Paul, thou didst learn things divine; and having lived in goodness and preserved the Faith unadulterated even unto the shedding of thy blood, thou wast shown to be a faithful hierarch, O apostle Timothy. Therefore, thou didst denounce the idolaters and, wounded by staves and stones, hast received the crown of martyrdom. Wherefore, O most blessed one, pray thou for us who celebrate thy most honored memory with faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O martyrs of the Lord…”—

The unblemished heifer, beholding her Calf nailed of His own will on the Tree, cried out, lamenting piteously: “Woe is me, O most beloved Child! How hath the thankless assembly of the Jews rewarded thee, desiring to leave me childless bereft of Thee, O most Beloved?”

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and this sticheron idiomelon, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Come, ye people, let us hymn the apostle Timothy, the lamp of the faith, who shone forth in the spreading of the Gospel; and let us say: Rejoice, O beautiful scion of faith, adopted son of the godly Paul! Rejoice, honored master of the virtues, greatly wise mouth of the Word! Rejoice, harp sounding forth the music of God to the ends of the earth! Rejoice, pillar of faith and ground of the Church!

Glory…, in Tone II—

O Christ, Thou didst magnify the power of the precious Cross in Judæa and in Babylon, for because of it they came to know the feast of Thy life-creating resurrection. And now the right laudable and glorious athlete Anastasius, a martyr of countless miracles, hath become for them a liberator from their enslavement by the madness of idolatry, joining chorus with the angels and praying for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Having endured many pangs during the crucifixion of thy Son and God, O all-pure one, thou didst groan, weeping and crying aloud: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that thou sufferest unjustly, desiring to deliver the mortal descendants of Adam?” Wherefore, O all-pure Virgin, we entreat thee with faith: Render Him merciful unto us!

Troparion of the apostle, in Tone IV—

Learning goodness and being sober in all things with a good conscience, arrayed as a priest thou didst draw forth ineffable things from the chosen vessel; and having kept the faith, thou didst finish the even course. O Apostle Timothy, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…: Troparion of the venerable martyr, in the same tone—

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Anastasius received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at naught the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

AT MATINS

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and one combined canon of the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the saints, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns I honor the Apostle Timothy”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

By thy supplications and with the radiant grace of dispassion, O blessed one, dispel the uprisings of the passions and the gloom of ignorance, that I may now worthily hymn thee, who art revealed by God.

God, Who knoweth all things beforehand, seeing the beauty of thy mind, O Timothy, showed thee forth, accounting thee a fellow minister with the divine apostles, taking thought concerning thee in His wise providence.

We know the one transcendent Source Who knoweth all things beforehand; for the apostle Timothy, enlightened by the grace of Christ from among the Greeks, is now counted with the divine Paul.

Troparia of the Martyr

Illumined by the most radiant dawning of Thy resurrection, O Christ, the namesake thereof, having hastened from the East like the sun, doth now illumine the Church with miracles.

Full of divine love, thou didst patiently endure tortures, O martyr Anastasius; and, adorned with the beauties of asceticism, thou wast brought to Christ, rejoicing, as a sacrifice of sweet savor, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O wellspring of grace! Rejoice, O ladder and portal of heaven! Rejoice, O golden lampstand and jar, O unquarried mountain, who for the world gavest birth unto Christ, the Bestower of life!

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Troparia of the Apostle

Grace was poured forth abundantly in thy lips, O most blessed one, and thou didst give rise to rivers of dogmas, which water the Church of Christ and produce much fertile fruit, O divinely wise Apostle Timothy, thou preacher of Christ.

In accordance with the prophecy, O most blessed one, thy feet were made beautiful; for thou didst proclaim the peace, which passeth all understanding, of the Savior and Lord of all, Who hath destroyed the ancient enmity of men, O most wise one.

Having mortified thy fleshly members, O blessed Timothy, thou didst make that which is baser subject to thy discourse, giving dominion to that which is more sublime; and, restraining the passions, thou didst illumine thy soul, instructed by the teachings of Paul.

Troparia of the Martyr

Having first trodden the narrow path by asceticism, thou didst attain unto the glory of martyrdom, finding delight through thy pangs because of thy torments, O glorious martyr Anastasius, and receiving heavenly beauty.

The pain of thy suffering hath gone forth into all the world, O invincible martyr; for, contending against sin even to the shedding of thy blood, thou wast victorious, and hast been adorned with a crown of victory.

*Theotokion:* From thee, O pure one, did the never-fading Bloom spring forth, Who perfumeth all humanity with the divine myrrh of His nature, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, yet came under time through thee, O most immaculate Virgin.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before…”—

Adorned with divine gifts, O glorious apostle, thou didst adorn the radiant metropolis of Ephesus; for thou wast shown to be a preacher, and with the divine Paul didst proclaim unto all the word of salvation. Wherefore, we celebrate thy memory with faith.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyr, in the same tone & melody—

Thou wast shown to be all-honorable in the glory of perfection, having enlightened thy mind as with divine effulgence and acknowledged the power of the Cross in godly manner; and thou becamest venerable through fasting and a martyr by the shedding of thy blood, O blessed Anastasius. Wherefore, Christ poureth forth the gift of miracles through thee.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most immaculate Virgin who gavest birth to the transcendent God: with the incorporeal ones do thou unceasingly entreat Him, that before the end He grant remission of transgressions and correction of life to us who hymn thee with faith and love as is meet, O thou who alone art most hymned.

Stavrotheotokion—

When she beheld Thee suspended upon the Cross, O Word of God, Thine all-pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and awesome wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death, desiring to bring life to mortals, in that Thou art compassionate?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Of thine own will suffering lawfully, O most blessed one, through extreme abstinence thou didst make the threefold billows of the passions subject to thy mind, receiving the perfection of virtue, O divinely wise Timothy, thou great preacher.

Shining like the sun, Paul emitted thee like a radiant beam, with manifest radiance illumining the whole world with rich light, O divinely revealed Timothy, unto our edification and confirmation.

Ardently desiring the uttermost of desires, and imbuing thyself with love, with zeal thou didst pass over to another life, O God-pleaser, ever contemplating thy Creator and delighting in the vision of Him.

Troparia of the Martyr

Naught could separate thee from thy love for Christ: neither dismemberment, nor the threat of wounds, nor the sword, nor death, nor fire, nor yet starvation, O Anastasius, who hast thine abode with the choirs of heaven.

Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder with zeal, thou didst follow the saving commandments of Christ; and as thou didst emulate Him even unto death, O most excellent one, thou dost now delight in His radiance.

*Theotokion:* Manifestly arriving from heaven, O pure one, the angelic commander announced joy to thee, saying: “God shall issue forth from thee in the flesh, O most pure virgin, unto the salvation of those who hymn thee with love!”

Ode V

*Irmos:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Troparia of the Apostle:

Illumined with the immaterial effulgences of the primal light of the Cause of all, thou hast illumined the world with honorable preaching; and thou hast manifestly been shown to be a beacon of piety emitting the discourse of the highest life, O most blessed initiate of the sacred mysteries.

The true disciple of the divine Paul followed the footsteps of his teacher, sowing his teachings among the faithful; and guided to the light of piety thereby, rising early out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Through enlightenment thou art shown to be a second Paul, ministering to the primal Radiance, with Whose understanding thou hast illumined us. Victoriously protected by his armor, Timothy hath been shown to be his ally in battle.

Troparia of the Martyr

The adversary of God, who of old boasted unrestrainedly, threatening to seize the earth and vainly claiming that he would destroy the whole sea, is trampled underfoot by thy goodly courage, O martyr Anastasius.

Having contended lawfully and emerged victorious, the martyr of Christ manifestly receiveth the ability to work miracles as reward for his sufferings; for Anastasius healeth infirmities and expelleth demons, working wonders through the power of Christ.

*Theotokion:* By thy birthgiving, O Virgin, thou hast annulled the curse of Eve, the mother of all, having given rise unto Christ, the Blessing of the world. Wherefore, rejoicing, with mouth and tongue we magnify thee, confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Troparia of the Apostle:

Thou wast shown to be a chariot of God, O God-pleasing Timothy, bearing His divine name before the face of the godless tyrants, undaunted by their savagery; for thou didst array thyself in the invincible might of the Savior.

Thou didst receive a magnificent crown, O divinely wise apostle Timothy, who art most rich; thou wast crowned with the diadem of the kingdom as is meet, and hast stood before the throne of thy Master, rejoicing with Paul in the mansions of heaven, O blessed one.

Perfumed with the noetic myrrh of Christ Who for our sake abased Himself by assuming flesh, O most honored Timothy, thou didst receive His sweet fragrance; and thou hast transmitted it to those who have recourse to thee with faith, O holy initiate of the ineffable mysteries of His noetic love.

Troparion of the Martyr

Manifestly illumined by the radiance of the Cross, thou didst dispel the gloom of falsehood and didst triumph, contending against the tyrant, O most glorious one; and, rejoicing, thou didst receive thy trophies of victory, O Anastasius, martyr of Christ, joining chorus with the armies of the martyrs.

*Theotokion:* The whole choir of the prophets, taught by God, foretold the mystery of thine ineffable and divine conception of the divine Word through thee, O Virgin Mother; for thou hast truly revealed the most true and ancient counsel.

Kontakion, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The angelic choir…”—

O ye faithful, let us all hymn Timothy, the divine disciple and companion of Paul, honoring with him the wise Anastasius, who shone forth from Persia like a star and dispelleth the passions of our souls and our bodily infirmities.

*Ikos:* The annual festival of the saints hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, illumined the faithful, dispelled all the power of the demons in its myriad forms, washed away infirmities and fulfilled the petitions of those who make entreaty. Wherefore, wretch though I am, I make haste and offer supplication out of the pain of my passion-plagued heart, that I may receive what I desire and obtain what I need: surcease from grief, a life free from sorrow, remission of transgressions and divine healing of soul and body.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

Troparia of the Apostle

Becoming a member of the chorus of the ranks of heaven as is meet, thou rejoicest in gladness, O blessed Timothy, initiate of sacred mysteries, delighting in light-bestowing radiance and proclaiming our praised and all-glorious God.

Performing the sacred propagation of the Gospel of Christ from the heights of the virtues, rejoicing, the most godly Paul sent divinely written epistles to thee, his disciple, O Timothy, proclaiming our praised and all-glorious God.

The weakness of the flesh thou didst strengthen with might of soul, O blessed of God; for, having lived on earth like one of the incorporeal hosts, thou becamest a martyr when thy head was crushed, O sacred minister of the mysteries of God.

Troparia of the Martyr

The athlete exhorteth the faithful, manifestly showing them his courage for an example, that they might now emulate the voluntary suffering which the praised and all-glorious God of our fathers endured for us.

The lovers of piety believe in the Trinity Whose Persons are equal in might; for the valiant athletes suffered therefor, shedding their blood, contending as martyrs, and manifestly rendering up their souls as they are slain.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O pure one, from whom the Shepherd in His compassion issued forth, Who, clothing Himself wholly in me, in the skin of Adam, is truly supremely glorified, the praised and all-glorious God of our fathers.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Troparia of the Apostle

Thou wast shown to be worthy to stand with the angels of the heavenly ranks, O blessed Timothy; for, having been taught supernaturally, thou didst emulate their radiance, O wise one. And with them thou dost chant in gladness: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Invested with power from heaven which descended in strange manner upon the disciples and eye-witnesses of the Word, thou wast shown to be an apostle, O divinely wise Timothy. And with them thou chantest, rejoicing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst stand forth, O most blessed Timothy, preacher of God, manifestly attaining the good things of uttermost desire, ever illumined brilliantly by the light of the Trinity; and thou now chantest in gladness: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Troparia of the Martyr

Crowned, thou didst soar aloft from earth to the heavens, O martyr Anastasius, escaping all the deception of the demons, and thou didst trample the temples of the idols underfoot. Wherefore, thou now criest out, rejoicing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst empurple thy vesture with the blood of thy martyrdom, O martyr who art most rich; and, bearing the Cross as a scepter, O Anastasius, thou reignest forever with Christ, to Whom thou now dost chant, rejoicing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The rich Word Who is glorified with angelic hymnody hath beggared Himself for our sake, choosing thee, the beauty of Jacob, O blessed one, to be His Mother. Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Troparia of the Apostle:

The saying of David hath been fulfilled, for thou hast appeared to the world like lightning, illumining the ends of the earth with thy preaching, O ever all-memorable and blessed Timothy. Wherefore, we unceasingly magnify thee, O thou who wast revealed by God.

Partaking of the light-bearing radiance and divine effulgence of the three-Sunned Godhead, and therein delighting in purity, O blessed and most honored initiate of the sacred mysteries, from the darkness of transgressions save those who hymn thee.

Made steadfast by the teachings of Thine apostles—Paul, the preacher of Thy dispensation, and the divinely wise Timothy—, O only-begotten Master, reasoning aright we glorify Thee as equal to the Father and the Spirit.

Troparia of the Martyr

With the streams of thy blood thou didst quench all the falsehood of idolatry, O glorious one, and didst adorn the fullness of the Church, for which do thou never cease to pray to the Master, O most excellent one, that we all may bless thee.

O thy glory and thy truly ineffable and divine radiance, which pass understanding, whereof thou hast partaken, O Anastasius, as a victor, standing before Christ the Master. Him do thou now entreat in behalf of us who hymn thee.

*Theotokion:* O thine awesome wonder! For, having given birth ineffably to God the Word, O Virgin Theotokos, thou hast revealed the mystery hidden in God, Who hath created all things, before time and before all generations.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable…”—

Two beacons shine forth radiantly in the world—Timothy, great among the apostles of Christ, and the martyr Anastasius, among his fellows,—whom we praise together.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All of us, the faithful, appoint thee as mediator before Him Who hath now been born of thee, O all-holy one; and we are crucified with Him for the sake of that which is more sublime. Wherefore, cease thou never to pray for us.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and, Glory…, in Tone V—

O venerable father, as vanquisher of the noetic Medes and Chaldæans, and in casting down all the falsehood of Babylon by the power of the Cross, thou wast not allayed by the soft pleasures, nor wast thou affrighted by the fire of thy trials; wherefore, Christ our God hath crowned thee with the honors of victory. Standing with the angels before the Lord, pray thou, asking peace and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

When thou didst behold the planted Cluster of grapes Whom, like a vine, thou didst produce, hanging upon the Tree, His divine side pierced by a spear, thou didst say: “What is this, O my Son and God? How is it that Thou Who healest all infirmities and sufferings dost undergo suffering, though Thou art dispassionate by Thy divine nature? How have the thankless people rewarded Thee thus for Thy benefactions, O Benefactor?” thou didst cry aloud, O all-pure one. By His sufferings pray that I ever be freed from sufferings, that I may glorify thee.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos; and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to Timothy, §290 \[II Tim. 1:3-9\]

Timothy my child: I thank God, Whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day; greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy; when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also. Wherefore, I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God; Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Luke, §50 \[Lk. 10: 1-15\]

At that time, the Lord also appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before His face into every city and place, whither He Himself would come. Therefore said He unto them: “The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth laborers into His harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say: Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them: The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your way out into the streets of the same, and say: Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, who art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.”

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

