The 26th Day of the Month of January

Commemoration of Our Venerable Father

Xenophon of Constantinople, Mary, his wife,

and their sons, Arcadius and John

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera: 3 from the Octoechos, and 3 for the saints, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “When from the Tree...”—

Shining forth in glory of soul, thou didst illumine thyself with almsgiving and faith; for, rejoicing, thou didst distribute thy wealth to the poor, and thy righteousness abideth forever in the never-waning light which shone forth from thee, O father, where thou dost behold thy children and her who gave them birth, dwelling in the heavenly city.

Having disdained corruptible glory, ye have been accounted worthy of incorruptible and divine glory; for, trampling down all the comeliness of life, O God-bearers, ye did in truth greatly desire the all-comely Christ, Who saved you from the threefold waves and the tempest of the world and guided you to the calm and radiant life, O ye who are most rich.

Having slain the passions of the flesh, ye did array yourselves in garments of dispassion, having woven them of the purity of your life; and having manifested while yet in the body a life equal to that of the angels, O ye of mighty wisdom, ye have all been accounted worthy of the glory of the angels in the highest, O ye that delight in radiance divine.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

The one uncontainable God, Who in His goodness became man, didst thou bear in thy womb without confining Him, O all-holy Bride of God. Wherefore, I beseech thee: Release me from the passions which constrict me, that, having trod the straight and narrow path, I may attain unto that which leadeth unto life, O Virgin.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

As thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree the ripe Cluster, Whom thou didst bear in thy womb without being tilled, O pure one, lamenting thou didst exclaim and cry aloud: “O my Child, pour forth the sweetness whereby all the drunkenness of the passions is dispelled! O Benefactor, for my sake, who gave Thee birth, be Thou entreated in Thy loving-kindness!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

O God of our fathers, Who ever dealest with us according to Thy gentleness, withdraw not Thy mercy from us, but by their entreaties direct our life in peace.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the saints, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Xenophon with his wife and children,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

O most wise ones, having as a family now truly obtained the tree of life and the delight of paradise, entreat ye Him Who loveth mankind, that He save those who praise you.

Thy servant, O Master, zealously treading the path of Thy commandments, hath attained unto the mansions of paradise through twofold desire, and doth enjoy everlasting life.

Unto all thou didst show thy house to be a new tent of Abraham. Wherefore, O wondrous one, rightly and justly hast thou found rest in the bosom of Abraham.

*Theotokion:* The Word Who is without beginning, Who shone forth from the Father before all ages and dwelt wholly within thee, O all-immaculate one, hath made me a new man.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Honored with most splendid glories, thou didst adorn thyself with a splendid life; for thou didst show forth the activity and ascent of the vision of God, crying out: Thou art our God, and none is holy save Thee, O Lord!

As a steward of all things, thou didst receive the care of all and didst distribute thy wealth unto those in need, wisely receiving ranks of monastics, O venerable father.

Nourishing thyself with the laws of the Master, O wondrous one, with instruction and edification in the Law of the Lord didst thou teach thy children, crying out: Thou art our God, and none is holy save Thee, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Come, O ye faithful, let us hymn Mary, the unwedded Theotokos, who alone remaineth a Virgin after giving birth, and is more holy than all the saints; and let us cry out: Rejoice, O pure Mother! Rejoice, O Mistress!

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared...”—

Having gladly distributed thy riches to the poor, O blessed one, with thy spouse and children thou wast vigilant in the commandments of the Lord. Wherefore, ye have inherited divine delight.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Being vigilant in the commandments of the Master, O blessed Xenophon, and instructing thy wife and children in like manner, with them hast thou inherited the kingdom on high, having left behind the tempest of all temptations. Wherefore, we all piously praise and honor you with love, and faithfully cry out: O most blessed God-bearers, pray ye to Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

All of us the generations of mankind, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, gave birth without seed unto God in the flesh; for the fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou dost nurture the Lord and Creator with thy milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the race of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy Offspring!

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, weeping, exclaimed and, bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving its deliverance through Thee; but my womb is pained to see the crucifixion which Thou dost endure in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy.” O long-suffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant remission of transgressions unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine Passion!

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Saved from the storm of life, ye made haste to the harbor of piety, O most blessed children.

Having learned knowledge both human and divine, it was your will to serve God.

Most gloriously delivered from the abyss of the world, O venerable ones, ye are come to the Abyss of blessings.

*Theotokion:* Delivered by the Blood which flowed from the side of Thy Son, O Mother of God, we all bless thee.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Passing over to that life which perisheth not, O Arcadius, thou didst make haste to go to the sacred city and there didst bow down before the tomb of Life.

Truly magnificent was the providence of the Master of all concerning thee, and wondrous and most glorious was His divine direction, O most blessed Arcadius!

Christ, Who of old lay in the arms of Symeon the divine elder, taking thought aforetime concerning thee, O Arcadius, guided thee, leading thee to a godly elder.

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature didst thou give birth unto the Son Who is without beginning, Who is equally eternal with the Father and became incarnate of thee, O all-immaculate Maiden. Wherefore, we proclaim thee to be the pure Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Desiring the blessed life, thou didst hasten to the assembly of monastics, making living inspiration thy companion, O John.

Rejecting the corruption and the deadly poison of the malice of the slayer of mankind, O John, thou didst make haste to the life-bearing tomb of Christ.

Thou didst emulate the life of John the Baptist, O John, for like him thou didst make thine abode in the wilderness and didst dwell there in purity, cleansing thyself for Christ.

*Theotokion:* He Who spread out the heaven at His desire, O pure Mother of God, hath made of thee another animate heaven, and from thee hath He shone forth upon those who are in darkness.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared...”—

Having escaped the sea of life, the righteous Xenophon, with his honored spouse and children, rejoice together in the heavens, magnifying Christ.

*Ikos:* Strange is the path which with thy spouse thou didst tread in godly manner, O Xenophon, for ye were not mindful of nature, and clearly showed yourselves to be as bodiless beings on earth. Wherefore, the portals of heaven have been opened unto you, and with your children ye join chorus with the angels, as godly laborers in the vineyard of the Lord. Wherefore, entreat ye Christ, that He grant the radiance of illumination unto the hearts of us who celebrate your splendid memorial, magnifying Christ, the Bestower of crowns.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The command of the iniquitous tyrant, opposed to God, raised up a lofty flame; but Christ, Who is blessed and all-glorious, spread a spiritual dew upon the pious youths.

Gazing upon your company with purity of mind, the God-bearer proclaimed: The righteous God, divinely rewarding your piety, hath gathered you together, for He is merciful!

He Who loveth mankind, beholding the zeal of your piety, accepting your desire and perceiving your faith, hath gathered you all together at one table, for He is the all-glorious Benefactor.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one, be thou a sure hope, a certain trust, an immovable rampart, a shelter and helper for me, who place my trust in thee; for on thee, O pure one, do I set all hope of my salvation.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fiery furnace divided its activity at the command of God, consuming the Chaldæans, but bedewing the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ye steadfastly endured separation one from another as it were a furnace burning with fire; for, torn apart within, your souls aflame, ye suffered the torment of martyrdom through the pangs of kinship.

From on high did the dew-bearing cloud of God’s love for mankind overshadow you on the mountains of Sion, where the dew of the Spirit enlightened the disciples, who cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

O fathers most rich, who were united in nature and joined together by grace, entreat ye our Benefactor to be merciful and kind unto us that celebrate your sacred memorial.

*Theotokion:* God the Word, the only-begotten Son, Who before the ages shone forth ineffably from the unoriginate Father, didst thou bear as the firstborn of creation. Wherefore, O Mother of God, all of us, the nations, glorify thee.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* God the Lord, the Son of the unoriginate Father, hath revealed Himself to us incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in darkness and to gather the dispersed. Wherefore, we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Taking the Cross of Christ upon your shoulders, ye truly trod the path of abstinence, exercising every virtue, until ye in truth received the life which ageth not, being crowned together as a family.

Having acquired mastery over carnal-mindedness, ye laid up the wealth of the Spirit as treasure, receiving the grace of healing from the Source of gifts. And now, having passed on to Him, ye rest eternally.

Conquering the wiles of the serpent, O venerable ones, ye have been called to the ultimate of honors, receiving crowns of righteousness from Christ, as is meet. Him do ye now entreat, that He save our souls.

*Theotokion:* Unto Him Who in the beginning was without mother in His first begetting, dost thou now give birth in the flesh without father, O Bride of God; and through the activities of His two natures, divine and human, is He known and believed.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars...”—

In God-pleasing manner didst thou distribute thy wealth to the poor, and with thy whole family thou didst unite thyself unto the Lord, O Xenophon. Him do thou beseech, O most blessed one, that He deliver us from the passions.

Theotokion—

Truly thy mighty works are beyond the armies of the angels and choirs of the saints, O pure one. Wherefore, entreat Christ in behalf of us sinful people.

