The 27th Day of the Month of January

Commemoration of the Translation of the Relics

of Our Father among the Saints, John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera: 4 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

With song let us hymn the clarion of beaten gold, the divinely inspired instrument, the unfathomable abyss of dogma, the foundation of the Church, the heavenly mind, the depth of wisdom, the cup all of gold which poureth forth rivers of most sweet teachings and giveth drink unto creation. *Twice*

Let us honor as is meet John of golden discourse: the star which waneth not, enlightening all the world with the rays of his teachings, the preacher of repentance, the sponge all of gold which draweth up all the dankness of grievous despair, and bedeweth hearts which waste away through sin.

In hymns let Chrysostom be magnified: the earthly angel and heavenly man, the golden-voiced lark most rich in song, the treasury of the virtues, the unbreakable stone, model for the faithful, like unto the martyrs, the equal of the holy angels, the peer of the apostles.

And 4 stichera in the same tone: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

Let us form a most sacred chorus, for the golden crown of the Church of Christ cometh today from Comana to the Imperial City, into royal glory. Radiant, he shineth from on high in his return; he leadeth the faithful into the immaterial kingdom and uniteth all to the King. Wherefore, let us cry aloud: O father of golden name, O divine and golden Chrysostom, entreat Him to save and enlighten our souls! *Twice*

As the radiant sky of the Church declineth toward the west, O Chrysostom, thou didst undergo imprisonment most cruel; but now, rejoicing, thou shinest forth unwaningly upon creation; adorned with stars of miracles, thou warmest it, O wise one; thou bearest Christ, Who outshineth the sun in His righteousness, Who now enlighteneth thy return. Wherefore, we cry aloud: O all-wise and most luminous golden mouth of radiant discourse, entreat Him to save and enlighten our souls!

Heaven and the angels now join chorus, and the assemblies of men make merry with creation; for he who is on earth, indicating all things of heavenly thought by the divine ladder of his honorable words, ascending on high by divinely trodden steps like a new Jacob, pointeth out the angels of God, who rejoice in his translation. Wherefore, we cry aloud: O most blessed one of golden discourse, converser with the immaterial angels, entreat God, that our souls be saved!

Glory..., idiomelon in the same tone, the composition of Cosmas—

It was not fitting for thee, O Chrysostom, when thou didst depart from the Imperial City, to dwell in Comana, from whence the royal invitation, made by God, hath brought thee back again to the Imperial City. And the Church rejoiced on seeing thee, and confessed, saying: My glory doth magnify the Lord, Who hath given me a bridal attendant, the confirmation of the Faith and the reception of my dignities, the peace of my temples, the sublimity of humble-mindedness, the depth of mercy, the breadth of my poverty and the length of repentance. Wherefore, we beseech thee, O venerable father: Ask peace and mercy for our souls!

Now & ever...: Dogmatic theotokion in the same tone.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon.

When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the light, she is found preëminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither bethought those who Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...”—

The Church of Christ rejoiceth, gazing upon thee, the sacred candlestick, the light-bearing luminary whom thine enemies, having cast down, hid beneath the bushel of silence; and it honoreth thee upon the mountain of the virtues, O venerable father, as a divine light illumining with miracles the ends of the whole world, more brightly than the sun. Today the impartial judgment of God showeth thy righteousness from on high to be like the great brilliance of the noonday, and giveth peace and great mercy unto those in the world.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall of speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

The distributor of grain for the world, who nourisheth the hearts of all with the heavenly sweetness of the Spirit, cometh not from Egypt, O ye faithful; but showing himself to be a new Joseph, he cometh forth today from Comana in his precious relics, by his supplications parting the tempest and the deep of grievous sorrows. Wherefore, let us bless him and cry out with faith: Come thou among those who celebrate thy memory, O blessed one, richly granting them salvation and great mercy.

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Thy shrine, O Chrysostom, poureth forth the divine myrrh of miracles upon the world, like a beautiful phial, and with streams of healings it perfumeth the souls of those who honor thee. With the grace of Christ, as with immaterial scents, hast thou enriched them, and thou impartest an ever-living fragrance unto those who have recourse unto it with faith. Wherefore, delighting in thy graces, O all-wise one, and having nourished ourselves on thine all-pure and divine relics, we ask with faith, that thou grant great mercy unto our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

O venerable, thrice-blessed and most holy father, thou good shepherd and disciple of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, who laid down thy life for thy sheep: Do thou now, by thy supplications, O most laudable John Chrysostom, ask that we be given great mercy.

Now & ever...: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Beseech Him with the holy apostles, we pray thee, O Mistress, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

The grace of thy mouth, shining forth like the radiance of fire, hath illumined all the inhabited earth. And it revealeth to the world no treasures of avarice, but hath shown us the heights of humble-mindedness. Instructing us by thy words, O father John Chrysostom, entreat the Word, Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Resurrectional theotokion—

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, didst cast down death by death, and as God didst reveal the resurrection: Disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory..., Now & ever...: Resurrectional theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

Like a golden and beautiful instrument of golden tone, divinely playing, O blessed Chrysostom, thou wast given by God to the Church as a golden-toned lark, making golden a mind clad in gold. O harp of repentance, by thy supplications from temptations do thou save those who honor thee, O right wondrous shepherd. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having fled to thy divine protection after that of God, O Theotokos, I, the lowly one, pray, falling prostrate: Have mercy, O all-pure one, for my sins have gone over my head, and I am afraid of torments, and I tremble. Make entreaty to thy Son, O pure one, that He deliver me from them.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph marvelled...”—

Having been counted worthy of the flock of Christ by divine judgment, O right wondrous shepherd, with the sling of thy words thou didst drive the wolves away from it, rebuking the iniquitous with severity, O wise one. And having been driven from them by envy, O Chrysostom, thou didst afterward tread a long path with steadfast mind, and thereon thou didst die. Yet thou hast returned with great glory, bestowing divine gifts. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Joseph marveled, beholding that which transcendeth nature, and pondering thy seedless conception he dwelt in thought upon the dew which fell upon the fleece, the bush unconsumed by the fire, and the rod of Aaron which put forth branches. And thy guardian and betrothed cried out to the priests: “The Virgin giveth birth, and even after birthgiving remaineth a virgin!”

After the Polyeleos, this Magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch, father John Chrysostom, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm—

A O hear ye this, all ye people; ponder it with your ears, all ye that dwell in the world. \[48:1\]

B My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of ­understanding. \[48:3\]

A Come, ye children, and hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[33:11\]

B I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[39:11\]

A My talk hath been of thy truth, and of thy salvation. \[39:12\]

B I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. \[21:22\]

A That I may show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. \[25:7\]

B Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwelleth. \[25:8\]

A I have hated the congregation of the wicked, and will not sit among the ungodly. \[25:5\]

B Because I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not forsaken my God, as the wicked doth. \[17:21\]

A The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[36:31\]

B His righteousness endureth for ever. \[110:3\]

A Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints sing with joyfulness. \[131:9\]

B Blessed are those who dwell in thy house; they will be alway praising thee. \[83:4\]

Glory..., Now and ever...

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “That which was mystically commanded...”—

Thou didst adorn thy life with true hierarchy, and with piety thou didst sow the word of the Lord among men, O Chrysostom, letting the rains of doctrine fall upon the earth through the radiance of the Spirit, O most wise one, planting good customs. Wherefore, receiving with faith the fruits of understanding, and tasting thereof, we have come to know the sweetness of divine glory. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

We ever thank and magnify thee, O all-pure Theotokos, and we bow down, hymning thy birthgiving and crying out unceasingly, O thou who art full of grace: Save us, O most merciful Virgin, in that thou art good, and snatch us from the demons at the hour of trial, the dread sentence, that we, thy servants, may not be put to shame.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* O hear ye this, all ye people; ponder it with your ears, all ye that dwell in the world.

Reading from the Gospel According to John §35 from the Midpoint \[10:1-9\]

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All who ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Thou wast shown to be a clarion of golden tone, O Chrysostom of golden discourse, making golden the hearts of the faithful by thy golden teachings. For the proclamation of thy corrections issued forth prophetically, O venerable father, and hath enlightened the ends of the whole world.

Canon of the all-holy Theotokos, with 6 troparia, including its irmos; and two canons for the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “Rejoice, O abode of joy, release from grief,” the composition of John, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Rejoice, O deliverance from the primal curse and wellspring of blessing! Rejoice, Mother of Life, destruction of hades, slaying of death! Rejoice, release from sorrow, spacious habitation of joy! Rejoice, O most lauded Theotokos!

Rejoice, O most immaculate one, thou noetic and animate chariot of the Word! Rejoice, chariot of many names, who art called chariot by the myriads of angels! Rejoice, thou who art undeniably more exalted than the cherubim and surpassest the seraphim!

Rejoice, O Bride of God, who art more sacred than the noetic hosts and more sublime than all created nature! Rejoice, thou palace of God! Rejoice, fiery throne! Rejoice, O Mistress, who art so called by the myriads of angels!

Rejoice, O undefiled one, who put forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse! Rejoice, offshoot of the rod of Aaron, which, prefiguring thee mystically and profoundly of old, yielded almonds, as thou didst blossom forth Christ.

Canon I of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee, the divine harp all of gold,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* The Red Sea is parted by that which was cut down, and the wave-ridden deep is dried up, becoming both a path for the defenseless and a grave for the armed. And a hymn of beauty divine is chanted: Christ our God hath gloriously been glorified!

Standing ever with all the elect before the throne of God, full of unwaning radiance, O venerable one, pray thou that peace and great mercy be given to us who honor thee with faith and celebrate thy divine return.

The earth danceth and heaven rejoiceth in godly fashion with us men on thy holy feast, whereon thy sacred body was returned to thy flock, O glorious Chrysostom, thou precious habitation of the Spirit.

The greatly crafty one could not bear the divine brilliance of thy mind, O blessed one, and he raised up temptations against thee, as he had against Job of old; yet therefore was he greatly benighted, for, lo! after thy banishment, O most luminous one, thou didst come again among thy flock.

With thy most golden words hast thou gilded the thoughts of the faithful, O Chrysostom; and being banished from thy flock out of malice, yet at the behest of God hast thou returned thereto after thy burial, radiantly praised, O most blessed Chrysostom.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth unto the all-holy God, thou wast shown to be more holy than the cherubim. Him do thou entreat as the Creator of all, that He sanctify all who bless thee with holy voices, O all-pure one, thou boast of the fathers and help of men.

Canon II of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant a third hymn to him of the golden tongue,” in Tone III—

*Irmos:* He Who of old gathered the waters into one at His divine behest, and parted the sea for the people of Israel, is our God and is most glorious. To Him let us chant, for He hath been glorified!

O God-proclaiming mouth, instrument of golden sound, with the splendor of thy words and thine entreaties enlighten my mind, that I may hymn the memory of thy return, O John, thou namesake of grace divine.

Having set beneath the earth, following the laws of nature, like a brilliant star, like the sun which enlighteneth men, like a luminary of piety, O venerable one, thou hast shone forth again upon us, thy children, emitting abundant rays of miracles.

Thou didst fill the whole world with teachings by thy tongue of golden eloquence; and thou hast illumined all with the golden members of healings, causing the darkness of sufferings to vanish by thy return, O venerable one.

*Theotokion:* Uttering divine things, thou didst speak of the Word as a single Hypostasis, even though He issued forth from the all-pure one in two natures, assuming flesh. Her do we bless unceasingly and glorify with faith, O divine Chrysostom.

Katavasia: Irmoi of the feast of the Meeting of the Lord—

The sun once passed over dry land born of the deep, for the water became firm as a wall on either side when the people traversed the sea, chanting in God-pleasing manner: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Rejoice, O Mistress, most mighty weapon of the faithful! Rejoice, mighty intercession! Rejoice, O help! Rejoice, aid of sinners! Rejoice, rampart for those who call upon thee! Rejoice, thou joy of the world!

Rejoice, mighty confirmation of man’s salvation! Rejoice, restoration of Adam and Eve, through whom they have regained the ancient inheritance! Rejoice, thou who hast opened paradise again!

Rejoice, bush unburnt! Rejoice, chariot of the Light! Rejoice, cloud of the Sun! Rejoice, all-glorious throne of the King, proclaimed in every place! Rejoice, animate city of Christ the living God!

Rejoice, O pure Mistress, Mother who hast not known wedlock! Rejoice, meadow unploughed and unharrowed, which produced the Husbandman of all! Rejoice, ground which shone forth the Truth!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Thou Who art God, the Lord and Creator of all, having impoverished Thyself, O Dispassionate One, Thou didst unite to Thyself that which Thou hadst made. Being the Passover, Thou didst sacrifice Thyself beforehand for those for whom Thou wast to die, crying: Eat ye My Body, and be ye steadfast in faith!

Thou wast a pure habitation of God and didst plumb the depths of dogma, O blessed Chrysostom, flooding the hearts of the faithful. Wherefore, we celebrate today thine honored return.

Thou wast a golden instrument sounding forth ineffable things for us, O blessed Chrysostom. Wherefore, we hymn thee with faith at the return of thy relics, O earthly angel of God and heavenly man.

To words of life didst thou give utterance for us; thou wast unjustly envied and wast driven into distant exile and subjected to many tribulations. Yet at the behest of the Creator, thou art given back to thy flock again, after thy repose.

*Theotokion:* Who can describe the height and depth of thine ineffable birthgiving, O Maiden? For, in manner past all description and comprehension, thou gavest birth unto God, Who hath delivered man from corruption. Wherefore, all we, the faithful, duly bless thee.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Most High, Thou Ruler of all, Who out of non-existence hast brought all things, which are fashioned by Thy Word and made perfect by the Spirit: Confirm me in Thy love!

Spiritually blind, the empress hid thee, the most radiant lamp, in caves of banishment; but Christ, returning thee again, setteth thee upon a lofty lampstand.

Thou hast returned, O John Chrysostom, letting fall streams of miracles and pouring forth rivers of healing upon those who with faith honor the memory of thy return.

The golden Nile hath returned, flooding forth in discourse and wonders. Let us all make haste and with faith abundantly draw therefrom, that we may be satisfied in all things.

*Theotokion:* Earthly nature is unable to hymn thee, whom the angels hymn as the one who gave birth unto God in the flesh; yet we, thy servants, with faith make bold to hymn and glorify thee.

*Katavasia:* O Lord, Thou confirmation of those who trust in Thee, establish the Church which Thou hast acquired with Thy precious blood.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

Having come to know the wisdom which is from on high and the grace of words from God, thou didst shine forth upon all like gold in the crucible, and didst preach the Holy Trinity in Unity, shooting down the falsehood of avarice with the arrows of thy discourses. Wherefore, having rebuked the empress with zeal, thou didst put to shame the alien thinking of Arius, O John Chrysostom. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

Having conceived One of the Trinity in manner transcending nature, O Virgin, and wondrously given birth to Him in manner past description and comprehension, thou didst cause human nature, which of old had been driven forth, to share in the divine Nature. Wherefore, O most immaculate one, all of us who have been saved by thy birthgiving, assembling, duly call thee blessed, following thy words, and entreating Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with faith glorify His Mother.

Ode IV

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

O orient of the effulgence of the Father, and sun of Him Who shone forth from the Father before the morning star: Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, light and animate cloud! Rejoice, O Mother! Rejoice, O blessed one! Rejoice, all-glorious and most immaculate one!

Thou, O Mistress, art the golden censer of the unbearable and immaterial Coal, by Whom the record of Adam’s disobedience, rent asunder, hath been set afire. Wherefore, I cry to thee: Rejoice, thou through whom joy, the sweetness and acquisition of paradise, hath been given unto all!

Thou art the glory, honor and boast of men, and the crown and diadem of the angels. Wherefore, heaven and earth, comprising a single Church, cry out to thee a hymn in all modes: Rejoice, O Mistress of the world! Rejoice, thou help of all men!

O honored couch which Solomon described of old, surrounded by sixty mighty men: Rejoice, O Virgin, golden ark of noetic sanctity! Rejoice, O divine tongs! Rejoice, fire-bearing bush! Rejoice, O gate, ladder and bridge!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The prophet, foreseeing Thine ineffable mystery, O Christ, proclaimed: Thou hast shown steadfast love of might, O compassionate Father; for Thou hast sent into the world Thy Son as its cleansing, O Good One.

Having acquired a mouth and tongue of fiery inspiration, O venerable father, thou hast manifestly heightened the clarity of the Scriptures, and didst die in unjust exile. But today thy blessed body hath been bestowed upon us as a gift.

Let Chrysostom now be magnified, the recounter of ineffable things; for, lo! after his temporal death, at the good behest of God, he entereth the Imperial City again, honored sacredly with divine hymns.

Possessing a mind illumined with the radiance of the most Holy Spirit, thou dost enlighten the earth with divine teachings, and dispellest the darkness of impiety, O sacred father Chrysostom, who conversest with the holy angels.

Thou wast shown to be blessed for righteousness’ sake, O venerable one, having been driven from thy flock by wicked envy; yet, returning now, thou art honored by all with sacred hymns, O wise Chrysostom, holy hierarch of the Lord.

*Theotokion:* Through thee, O Virgin, salvation hath come and appeared to the world, even Christ, our Deliverance who shone forth from thee. Wherefore, we hymn thee as is due, O pure one, boast of all the sacred and sanctified habitation of the faithful.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* Thou hast shown us constant love, O Lord, for Thou didst give Thine only-begotten Son over to death for us. Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O ye who love discourse, come, and let us honor with sacred words the great adorner of words, who hath now joyfully returned and who with the wisdom of words denounced those who babbled words of vain ignorance.

O Chrysostom, who hath enriched us with a wealth of teachings, thou holdest in check the hand of greed, with but the riches of divine grace alone manifestly denouncing her who was laden with wealth.

The bow of those mighty in tyrannical cruelty hath been broken; for, having lived angelically in the weakness of the flesh, thou hast prevailed, O most sacred Chrysostom, having as petitioners those who before were persecutors.

*Theotokion:* The noetic ranks praise thee with hymnody, O Maiden, for they are unable to look upon Him to Whom thou gavest birth from thy pure womb, Who without change assumed flesh, O most pure Bride of God.

*Katavasia:* Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Christ; for having issued forth from Thine immaculate Mother, the ark of Thy holiness, Thou hast appeared in the Temple of Thy glory as a babe borne in arms, and all things have been filled with Thy praise.

Ode V

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Grant that I may elude the noetic minions, the aerial hordes of tormenters, without grief at the hour of my departure, O Mistress, that I may joyfully cry to thee: Rejoice, rejoice, O unashamed hope of all!

Rejoice, O all-immaculate one! Rejoice, O all-pure one, in that thou didst conceive our Joy! Rejoice, purple bloom of purity, sweet of scent! Rejoice, scarlet rose of virginity, dyed red, and sweet-smelling fragrance of God!

Rejoice, O mystic phial pouring forth myrrh of sweet savor! Rejoice, divine wellspring gushing forth living water! Rejoice, thou who didst produce as fruit the grapes of life, O Mistress, thou vine ­uncultivated!

Rejoice, O impassable Gate through which Christ the Lord passed! Rejoice, thou who by thy birthgiving hast opened the portals of paradise! Rejoice, thou on whose account the heavens rejoice and earth doth dance, who hast united things above with things below.

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The apostles, bound with a bond of love, offered themselves unto Christ the Master of all, and washed their beautiful feet, announcing the glad tidings of peace unto all.

Thou hast been shown to be a lamp shining upon all who are in the night of life, casting light upon and illumining our thoughts with the beams of thy divine words, O father Chrysostom. Wherefore, we hymn thee as is due.

Thou didst distribute a wealth of discourse, enriching starved minds, O venerable one of golden speech; and, exiled unjustly, by righteous judgment thou hast been returned again to thy flock, which rejoiceth in thy great accomplishments.

Like a bountiful vine thou didst produce the wine of compunction; and, for denouncing the empress who confiscated the widow’s vineyard, thou wast banished, O father Chrysostom. Wherefore, we honor thy return.

*Theotokion:* Him Whom the armies of the incorporeal angels cannot see, O Mistress, Who lay in thine embrace as an Infant, and Who abased Himself by assuming flesh, didst thou bear, that, so impoverishing Himself, He might enrich the world.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* I rise at dawn unto Thee, the Creator of all, Who passest all worldly understanding; for Thy commandments are light, wherein do Thou direct me.

Thou hast been shown to be like the springtime, mystically perfuming the multitudes of the faithful with the flowers of grace, dispelling the winter of evil in thy return, O father.

Streaming forth divine things, the wellspring of divine gifts hath returned. Come, ye who thirst, and draw forth the water of life with faith, divinely jubilant!

“Woe is me! Thou, O my beauty, didst hide thyself, going down! Yet thou hast returned to me, O desired one, in good time,” the Church of Christ crieth out to thee, who hast returned.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, render merciful to me Him Who came forth from thy womb, the incarnate Word, Whom Symeon, holding in his arms in the temple, magnified as the Creator.

*Katavasia:* In a vision Isaiah beheld God exalted upon a throne borne aloft by angels of glory, and he cried: Woe is me! for I have beheld beforehand the incarnate God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!

Ode VI

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Rejoice, O Mistress, animate vessel, scarlet which dyed a purple robe for the King of all with thine all-pure blood wherewith to cover the nakedness of Adam! Rejoice, O most lauded one!

Tangible bread by nature strengtheneth men’s hearts, O Maiden; and thy holy and laudable name maketh steadfast Christian souls. Hence, every tongue doth joyfully cry out to thee: Rejoice!

Rejoice, golden candlestick! Rejoice, ark which held God! Rejoice, tabernacle! Rejoice, holy mountain! Rejoice, animate city of the living God! Rejoice, palace of Christ! Rejoice, divine and most splendid temple!

Rejoice, O all-immaculate and all-pure one, excellent flower of nature! Rejoice, common wealth of the human race! Rejoice, God-given grace, who hath brought honor upon disgraced human nature by thy birthgiving!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of sins hath engulfed me, whose billows none can withstand; and like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Master: Lead me up from corruption!

O most blessed Chrysostom, thy tongue hath poured forth upon the Church streams of gold and enricheth starving hearts, which glorify thee in sacred manner.

O most blessed one, precious hath thy death been in the sight of our God, wherein thy city is glorified by thy second return to thy throne, O father Chrysostom.

Blessed is the tomb which holdeth thy precious body, in that it enricheth with miracles those who have recourse thereto with faith, O Chrysostom, most blessed hierarch.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth unto the Most High, O all-holy Bride of God, thou exaltest to heaven our nature which lieth below. Wherefore, we glorify thee as is due.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss of sins hath engulfed me, and my spirit doth perish. But, stretching forth Thine upraised arm, O Master, save me as Thou didst Peter, O Helmsman!

The foolish empress cut thee off from the Church of Christ, denouncing thee in a rage; but straightway she herself was cut off, and thou reprovest her even after death, causing a miraculous excommunication.

Thou wast shown to be an instrument of the Spirit Who accomplisheth all things, sounding forth with great melodiousness; but the empress became deaf, as oblivious to the music as an adder; and she received a most dreadful death as recompense.

Though he died a mortal death, Chrysostom manifestly taught the rulers not to torment him; for, having first declined to submit to their commands, he later returned at their entreaty.

*Theotokion:* Contemplating Thee, Who alone art born of a Virgin, even as Thou didst receive flesh and becamest two in nature, John Chrysostom rejected utterly both division and confusion, O Jesus, Who art God and man.

*Katavasia:* The elder, beholding with his own eyes the salvation which was come to me from God, cried out to Thee, O Christ! Thou art my God!

Kontakion, in Tone I—

The honored Church was mystically gladdened by the return of thy precious relics; and having hidden them like most precious gold, by thy supplication she bountifully imparteth the grace of healings unto those who hymn thee, O John Chrysostom.

*Ikos:* The lamp of my soul hath guttered, O John Chrysostom, and I fear to encounter thy sacred relics; but do thou thyself guide me, and direct my steps, granting me time for repentance, O most holy one, in that thou art a divine preacher thereof. And still thou the tempest of my multifarious passions and, rescuing me from the snare of Belial, save me in the end, that I may worthily hymn thy glorious return, as before, making bold, I also glorified thy repose, O John Chrysostom.

Ode VII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Rejoice, O Mistress, Virgin and Mother who gavest birth to the Son, who hast not known wedlock, who alone knewest not man and alone art incorrupt!

Rejoice, O Bride of God, thou animate Sion of Christ, the King of kings, of which most glorious things have been spoken! Rejoice, ladder whereby we ascend to heaven from earth, and from corruption to life.

A divinely planted meadow, a fragrant garden cultivated by God, hast thou been shown to be, O Virgin, who hast blossomed forth the Flower of immortality. Wherefore, together we cry out to thee: Rejoice, rejoice, bestower of joy! Rejoice, wellspring of sweetness!

O all-honored Mistress, deliver me from the disgrace of the passions, that I may cry out joyfully to thee: Rejoice, wellspring of holiness! Rejoice, treasury of all purity! Rejoice, divine receptacle! Rejoice, habitation of Christ!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon did not fear the flame of the furnace, but, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Resplendent with miracles, adorned with golden theology, thou wast given over to cruel banishment; but returning therefrom, thou hast been glorified by all.

With the scythe of thy divine teachings thou cuttest wickedness off at the root and plantest divine knowledge in men’s souls, O holy hierarch Chrysostom. Wherefore, we glorify the return of thy relics.

Returning, O venerable Chrysostom, thou hast brought peace to the alienated and hast been placed in the church of the most wise apostles, with whose honored authority thou wast enriched, O most lauded one.

*Theotokion:* O most pure one, thou gavest birth to Jesus Christ, One of the transcendent Trinity. Him do Thou entreat, O most immaculate one, that in His ineffable loving-kindness He may forgive my manifold transgressions.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* As of old Thou didst bedew the three pious children in the Chaldæan flame, with the radiant fire of Thy divinity illumine us who cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The most audacious woman forced thee to depart from the Imperial City, O all-wise one, because thou didst denounce her eviction of the widow; and by her rejection of thine all-wise teaching, she is bereft also of the grace of God.

Yet, like the sun which had been covered by clouds, O luminary of exceeding magnificence, thou didst return sweetly unto all who have been enlightened by the mystic splendor of thy luminous golden teachings, O John Chrysostom.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, O Chrysostom, to embrace thee, the escort of the Bride who returnest in splendor, loved exceedingly, in that thou didst wait for many years.

*Theotokion:* Thou comest to the temple like mystical tongs, bearing the mystical Coal, O all-pure one, by Whom Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, was enlightened to prophesy with exceeding clarity concerning the signs of His sufferings.

*Katavasia:* We hymn Thee, God the Word Who bedewed the theologizing children in the fire and dwelt within the incorrupt Virgin, and piously we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* O children, equal in number to the Trinity, bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word, Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who imparteth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

Rejoice, O branch which grew out of the root of Jesse! Rejoice, thou who, without being watered, didst blossom forth Christ, the beautiful Flower! Rejoice, fertile mountain! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, mountain of God in Whom the Word Who existeth before all time was pleased to dwell!

With the iron staff of thy mighty aid do thou fend off the passions which beset me like dogs lying in wait, like roaring wild beasts, surrounding my lowly soul, O Virgin, that I may cry to thee: Rejoice!

Thou hast been adorned, O thou who art beautiful among women, who hast given birth unto Christ, Who is more comely in beauty than all the sons of men. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to thee: Rejoice! rejoice, O pure and joyous Theotokos! Rejoice, thou who art more glorious than all creation!

Rejoice, O Theotokos, whom Daniel beheld beforehand as a mountain unquarried, thou from whom the Cornerstone was cut! Rejoice, tongs pleasing unto God, which bore the burning Coal! Rejoice, thou who art more holy than the immaterial angels! Rejoice, thou who art higher in honor than creation!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* The blessed youths in Babylon, braving danger for the laws of their fathers, reviled the mindless command of the ruler, and, united by the fire which burned them not, they chanted a fitting hymn unto the Almighty: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Possessing the authority to loose and to bind, O venerable one, thou hast loosed all the transgressions of those who celebrate thy divine return with splendor. Pray thou also, that they be counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven who chant in compunction of heart: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

In exile, O divinely wise father, thou didst endure pangs, receiving therein a blessed and glorious end, O Chrysostom; but thou returnest again, by the will of God, to thy divine see, honored by those who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Unable to bear the darts of thy words, O venerable one, the false serpent asketh to test thee, as he did the valiant Job; but he was vanquished by thine endurance for Christ’s sake, and wast shown to be a great occasion for laughter for thee, who chantest with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Triadicon:* O unoriginate Father, Son equally without beginning, and divine Spirit, indivisible Trinity, one Essence, one Power, one Authority: Fill those who hymn Thee with every good thing, and deliver them from torment that chant unceasingly: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* The human mind is unable to understand the mystery of thine ineffable birthgiving, which is beyond comprehension and recounting, O Maiden; for God appeared as a mortal through thee, saving those who had fallen into corruption, and raising up to their pristine dignity those who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With the milk of thy piety dost thou nurture the Church which nurtured thee, O venerable father, giving her seven loaves of the bread of divine grace and pouring forth thy sweetness as a drink of healing, O most blessed Chrysostom, who nourishest us.

The proclamation of thy dogmas went forth into all the earth, O father, yet the mindless empress commanded that thou be driven from thy place; but she was deceived: for like a giant with a tremendous stride thou shinest everywhere with the rays of thy words.

Let the assembly of the faithful be enlightened today, greeting the most excellent of teachers with gladness; for he hath come and is present in body, distributing abundant grace unto all, which we, rejoicing, do richly enjoy.

*Theotokion:* “I behold Thee in Thy mother’s arms, and I know Thee to be unapproachable God by nature. How, therefore, O Word, art Thou held in arms, Who hast all creation in the palm of Thy hand?” said Symeon, glorifying Thine ineffable power, O Thou Who art God and man.

*Katavasia:* United in the unbearable fire, yet unharmed by its flame, the pious youths chanted a divine hymn in intercession: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Behold, all generations call thee all-blessed, as thou didst foretell by the divine Spirit, O Theotokos; and they cry out to thee, as to the one who gave birth unto Joy: Rejoice, rejoice, O treasury of life! Rejoice, O wellspring which poureth forth spiritual honey!

O pure Mistress, thou didst set aright the stumbling of our forefather Adam, and didst turn the grief of Eve, our first mother, into joy. Wherefore, we cry to thee, as to the cause of joy: Rejoice, rejoice, O joy of the faithful! Rejoice, gladness of Christians!

Meet it is to cry to thee: “Rejoice!”, for in thee did the ever-existent Joy make His abode in essence, O Virgin Maiden Theotokos. Rejoice, O paradise of sweetness! Rejoice, wellspring of immortality flowing with streams of gold! Rejoice, thou who pourest forth true drink!

The desire for thee pierceth my heart with an arrow of sweetness, O most lauded one, and compelleth me ever to cry out to thee: “Rejoice!”, and to cry: Rejoice, peaceful haven! Rejoice, O sweetest impassable sea, who didst drown the noetic Pharaoh!

Canon I of the Saint

*Irmos:* Come, ye faithful, and with minds uplifted let us delight in the hospitality of the Master and the feast of immortality in the lowly cave, knowing the Word, Who we magnify, and Who hath become incarnate ineffably.\*

Thou wast a rule of the priesthood, O divinely eloquent one, arrayed with righteousness as with divine vesture, with thy words having enriched the Church and spiritually made plain the meaning of the Scriptures. Wherefore, we celebrate thy return, O father.

Beautiful as a nightingale wast thou shown to be, O father, announcing the divine spring of repentance to those who are enslaved to the winter of sin. Though thou wast banished through the treachery of the deceiver, O wise one, thou dost hasten again, rejoicing, to the flock which desireth thee, O blessed Chrysostom.

The hearts of all are jubilant today, beholding thee, the pure bridegroom, O venerable one, given by grace to the Church, thy bride; and with unceasing voices they hymn and praise and bless the Bestower of good things, as is meet.

The lamp which was set upon the lampstand of Comana is come! The ornament of the Church of God hath arrived! Hymn ye the Lord! Sing with gladness! And greeting him spiritually, let us all cry aloud: By thy supplications, save us, O father!

*Theotokion:* With the most radiant brilliance of Him Who was ineffably born of thee, O Maiden, illumine my soul which hath been darkened by all manner of transgressions, O holy and most holy Theotokos, and which doth not desire to do good; that I may unceasingly declare thy mighty works.

Canon II of the Saint

*Irmos:* A wonder new and divine: the Lord manifestly passeth through the closed door of the Virgin, naked at His entry; and God doth reveal Himself as corporeal as He issueth forth; and yet the gate remaineth shut. Ineffably let us magnify her as the Mother of God.

The army of angels, the council of the prophets and the divine choir of apostles and martyrs exult in splendor with us, sharing in the feast, O most blessed one, and esteeming the grace of thy hymns; for thou didst have all within thee, depicting life.

Lo! the light of the world hath shone forth, the divine and most exalted lamp hath appeared therein, the delightsome abyss of the gifts of God. Come, brethren, let us partake of the light, that we may warm ourselves, and that we may draw forth therefrom, all magnifying Chrysostom with hymns from our heart.

Emulating the divine grace, accept me who offer this hymn to thee like two mites, from mine unworthy and wretched soul, which is wretchedly bereft of every good quality and offereth this out of zeal for the riches of God; and render thou unto me in return divinely-bestowed grace.

*Theotokion:* “Approaching, I tremble,” said Symeon, “yet am I strengthened, holding in mine arms thine Offspring, O Virgin, Who causeth all the earth to tremble at His mere gaze from on high; and I am already removed from the quaking flesh. Rejoicing, I bear the declaration of those things which are to be, fulfilled already in me, and I shall announce the glad tidings of deliverance to those who are in hades.

*Katavasia:* In the shadow and the writings of the law do we behold an image, O ye faithful: every male child which openeth the womb is consecrated to God. Wherefore, we magnify the first-born Word of the unoriginate Father, the first-born Son of the Mother who knew not man.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Rejoice, O city reigning over all cities, for today thou receivest the body of thy good shepherd and chief pastor, who governeth and saveth thee and all the world: the mellifluous Chrysostom. Clap thy hands, therefore, and sing. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O palace of God! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, bush unburnt! Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, golden jar! Rejoice, most luminous lamp! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, thou light cloud!

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign...”—

Thy sacred teachings, poured forth, O all-wise one, more radiant than gold, enrich the understanding of the hungry and dispel the gloom of the passions and the bitter winter of avarice, O Chrysostom. Wherefore, we bless thee as is meet and honor the return of thy relics, as a wellspring of holiness.

Unjustly driven from thy flock, O venerable father, thou didst endure tribulations and bitter exile; wherein thou wast counted worthy of a blessed end, as a good athlete who trampled the greatly crafty one. Wherefore, the Church rejoiceth in thy return, which thou didst adorn as with gold with thine all-wise teachings.

Today is the blessed Chrysostom hymned as a pillar of fire, a river flowing with the waters of doctrine, a heavenly intelligence, a mouth of theology all of gold, the surety of sinners, a divine preacher of repentance, an all-luminous lamp, and a heavenly man.

Receiving thy relics, O Chrysostom, like a royal ornament, the Imperial City is adorned thereby, and boasting in thy words, it calleth the whole world to gladness and to a divine share in thine abundant gifts, crying aloud: O all-good Jesus, Thou art the glory of Thy servants!

Glory..., idiomelon in the same tone, the composition of Germanus—

O father Chrysostom, like a divinely flowing river mystically issuing forth in the beginning from Eden, passing over the four ends of the earth in thy words, thou hast watered each of the faithful with thy golden teaching. Wherefore, having manifestly bestowed upon our city the return of thy divine relics, do thou now pray, that the souls of us who praise thee may be saved, O John.

Now & ever...: Theotokion—

Preserve thy servants from all misfortunes, O blessed Theotokos, that we may all glorify thee, the hope of our souls.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia, from Odes III and VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* O hear ye this, all ye people; ponder it with your ears, all ye that dwell in the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews §318 \[7:26-8:2\]

Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the *people:* for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: we have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to John §36 \[10:9-16\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

