The 31st Day of the MONTH OF JANUARY

Commemoration of the Holy Wonder-workers & Unmercenary Physicians Cyrus & John

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Illumining the whole world with rays of miracles, O Cyrus and John, all-radiant beacons, ye were like unto the heavens in grace, displaying like stars the virtues of your exalted life. *Twice*

O martyrs of the Lord, O rain-bearing clouds who excelled in manifold miracles of grace, ye water the whole world noetically, prevailing upon the healthy to offer hymnody to God.

Truly receiving from God the skill to heal the sufferings of soul and body, O martyrs of the Lord, ye supernaturally heal all not by means of human medicines, but by the inspiration of God.

Surrounded by the hosts of heaven, O radiant luminaries Cyrus and John, O valiant athletes, ye heal the bodies of those on earth and wounded souls for Christ’s sake. Entreat Him, that He save us.

Following Christ, the Fountain of glory, ye have been shown to all as wellsprings of immortality, and pour forth sweet streams which cure and heal men’s bodies and souls; for ye zealously shed streams of blood for Christ.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Two martyrs have shone forth upon us today, healing the pangs of our souls: Cyrus and John, the wonder-workers. The one, embracing the angelic life and living it to the end, united himself to Christ by the blood of martyrdom; and the other, shining forth among the military ranks, is now enrolled in the armies of heaven. Wherefore, they impart healing to those who with faith celebrate their memory, praying for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

“I cannot bear to see Thee, O my Child, Who givest vigilance to all, asleep upon the Tree, that Thou mayest bestow divine and saving wakefulness upon those who of old fell into the sleep of perdition by eating the fruit of disobedience!” the Virgin said, weeping. Her do we magnify.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone II—

Come, ye assembly of the faithful, and with hymns let us crown Cyrus and John today: the soldiers of grace and most generous fulfillers of petitions; for in manifold ways they have been shown unto all as most splendid physicians. Wherefore, they pray for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When thou didst behold the most ripe Cluster, Whom thou didst produce in thy womb without cultivation, O pure one, hanging upon the Tree, thou didst exclaim, lamenting, and cry out: “O my Child, let fall a drop of sweetness, whereby all the drunkenness of the passions may be banished! O Benefactor, be Thou entreated in Thy loving-kindness for the sake of me who gave Thee birth!”

Troparion, in Tone V—

O Christ God Who hast given us the miracles of Thy holy martyrs as an invincible rampart, through their supplications set at naught the counsels of the heathen and strengthen the scepters of kings, in that Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

AT MATINS

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the saints, with 6 troparia, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Thou didst receive the power to oppose falsehood, O blessed Cyrus, having the glorious John as the fellow sufferer of thy pangs; wherefore, ye delight in most sublime sweetness in the heavens.

Girded about with spiritual skill in battle, O most honored Cyrus, and having forsaken the earthly army, O most lauded John, ye have received from Christ victories over the demons.

Emulating the virtue of the blessed woman Thecla, ye piously arrayed yourselves in the angelic vesture of virginity and together were drawn to the contest by your love of martyrdom.

*Theotokion:* Without seed, by the will of the Father, thou didst conceive the Son through the divine Spirit of God and gavest birth in the flesh to Him Who was begotten of the Father without mother and, for our sake, from thee without father.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

The weakness of their flesh fortified by the sufferings of Christ, the right glorious martyrs cast down the murderer of men.

Receiving incorruptible sweetness through the Spirit, the martyrs of Christ rejoiced amid the pangs of their flesh.

By the Cross was the weak nature of women strengthened; wherefore, they manfully vanquished the adverse serpent.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, thou alone hast been the mediatress of good things for mortals in manner transcending nature; wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice!

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “O Thou Who wast lifted up…”—

Trampling underfoot the pleasures which drag men down, by grace ye were taken up in splendor to the divine heights of martyrdom, O athletes Cyrus and John, ye luminaries of all the world. Wherefore, we beseech you: From the darkness of sin and afflictions deliver us, entreating Him Who is God over all. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

I, the lowly one, have fled to thy divine refuge after God, and, falling down, I pray: Have mercy, O all-pure one, for my sins have passed over my head. O Mistress, I fear torments and tremble. Make supplication to thy Son, O pure one, that He deliver me therefrom.

Stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter times gave birth in the flesh to Thee Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross cried out: “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! How is it that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels art now of Thine own will crucified by iniquitous men? O my long-suffering Son, I hymn Thee!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The effulgence of never-waning grace cast down the enemies who loved darkness, showing forth Cyrus and John, who fought against them, to be radiant luminaries.

Cyrus and John delighted in the love of the Trinity and, as martyrs exceedingly beloved by God, they were shown to be divine instruments through higher union.

In that your honored temple is hateful to the evil spirits, it dispelleth the infirmities of all who are ill, O invincible martyrs, and imparteth the grace of healing.

*Theotokion:* Without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, thou gavest birth, yet wast shown to be virgin even after birthgiving. Wherefore, with unwavering faith, O Mistress, we cry out to thee with constant voices: Rejoice!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

The two martyrs desired Thee, O Savior; and Thou Who art holy among the saints hast granted repose to Cyrus and John as is meet.

Thy work, O Good One, is the destruction of the enemy, and by the Cross Thou hast made martyrs of piety and crowned them with glory.

Having anointed themselves with virginity to love Thee alone with wisdom undaunted, John and Cyrus showed forth courage.

*Theotokion:* We set thee before us as an invincible weapon against the enemy, O Bride of God; for thee do we have as the steadfastness and hope of our salvation.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

The martyrs chose to be slain for Christ rather than offer sacrifice to idols, and to offer themselves to the wicked tyrant for Him Who like a lamb was slaughtered for us in His loving-kindness.

The martyrs made weak those who piteously dismembered them, and, wounded by darts, they wounded the children instead; for they were all-gloriously made steadfast by the divine Spirit.

Confessing the Lord and King of all creation with faith, the two martyrs were of one mind and suffered together, opposing the iniquitous even to the shedding of their blood.

*Theotokion:* O wonder newest of all wonders! For the Virgin, conceiving in her womb Him Who sustaineth all things, without knowing a man, yet did not confine Him.

Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Receiving the gift of miracles from grace divine, O saints, ye work wonders unceasingly, cutting down all our passions with invisible surgery, O divinely wise Cyrus and glorious John; for ye are divine physicians.

*Ikos:* Offering yourselves to God, O saints, ye endured every trial for His sake, dying zealously, O valiant martyrs; and even after your repose ye pour forth divine gifts upon all in divers infirmities, healing many of afflictions, of whom I am first, wretch that I am. For I ail in body and soul because of cruel wounds, and with faith I cry out to you: Heal me, for ye are divine physicians.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Measuring wisdom as in the balance of a scale with the weight of all-pure glory, the athletes, suspended aloft, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Well aware of the machinations of the adversary, the martyrs, spurning alike all manner of torture and blandishments, cried: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Crowned with the endurance of wounds, Cyrus and John, the defenders of the Trinity, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O hallowed and divine habitation of the Most High! For through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The ungodly ones cruelly called upon Cyrus and John to deny Him Who is God by nature; but the invincible martyrs proclaimed the Fashioner of all creation, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Raging with anger and deceit, the tormenters, their minds set on earthly things, by death sent to life those who have life indestructible in the heavens, and who cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The relics of the martyrs have disclosed to the whole world the brilliance of miracles, O Christ, putting to shame the phantasmal falsehood of the evil demon and magnificently imparting healings to those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* The Incorporeal One, Who was begotten of the Father without mother in the beginning, was later incarnate through thee, O most pure one, desiring in His compassion to save those who sing: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Cyrus and John, the two invincible martyrs, showed themselves to be obedient to the divine commandments of the Master even unto death. Wherefore, they placed their souls in the hands of the Creator.

The two luminaries shine with the radiance of miracles from the only light-bearing Source, pouring forth grace incorruptible unto the infirm. We magnify them as is meet.

Manfully the two invincible martyrs theologized concerning the Unity of the divine Essence, the Trinity of Hypostases, and the one Christ, the Word incarnate in two natures.

*Theotokion:* Have pity on me, O Christ, when Thou wilt come to judge the world with glory, and lift the darkness of my passions through the ­entreaties of her who gave Thee birth and of Thine honored martyrs, in that Thou art good and greatly merciful.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—

O wonder-working luminaries Cyrus and John, having received from the Lord the grace of healings, cure ye our infirmities of soul and body.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the cause of the good things given by God to the world, O Theotokos. Entreat God, Who is easily reconciled, for the salvation of us all.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone IV—

With hymns of goodly laudation, O ye faithful, let us magnify Cyrus and John, who in spirit were as of one blood and in the flesh were of brotherly mind, praising with them the valiant Athanasia and her offspring, Theodote, Eudoxia and Theoctiste, the ever-virginal athletes, who entreat Christ in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

“Do not lament Me, O Mother, beholding hanging upon the Tree thy Son and God Who suspended the earth unsupported upon the waters and fashioned all creation; for I shall arise and be glorified, and shall crush the kingdoms of hades with strength; I shall destroy its power and deliver those in bondage from its evil activity, for I am compassionate; and I shall bring them to My Father, in that I love mankind.”

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the saints’ canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §153

\[I Cor. 12: 27-13: 8\]

Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the Church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are all workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in unity?

*Stichos:* For there the Lord commanded the blessing, life for evermore.

Gospel according to Matthew, §34

from the midpoint \[10: 1, 5-8\]

At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: “Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand!’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

