The 1st Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The Holy Cosmas & Damian,

Wonder-Workers & Unmercenary Physicians In Asia

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone VI: Automelon —

Having placed all their hope in the heavens, the saints laid up for themselves a treasure which cannot be stolen away; they freely received, and freely give healing to the infirm. Following the Gospel, they acquired neither silver nor gold, but bestowed benefactions upon both men and beasts, that, obedient to Christ, they might pray with boldness in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

*In the same melody:* The two holy ones who shared a single character and a single soul, the like-minded companions, disdained corruptible things on earth and showed themselves to be inhabitants of heaven, like unto the angels, though dwelling in the flesh: wherefore, they grant healings to all who suffer, bestowing benefactions upon those in need, without exacting any fee. Let us honor them as is meet with an annual festival, for they pray to Christ with boldness in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

The divinely wise Cosmas and Damian, the two ever-memorable ones, having made themselves wholly the abode of the Trinity, pour forth like torrents the waters of healing from the life-bestowing wellspring; and their relics cure suffering by their touch; and their very names drive infirmities away from all men who have recourse to the saving havens in Christ; and they pray with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Having spurned the tyranny of suffering and, in Christ, trampled down every plot of the evil serpent, O holy unmercenary ones, Cosmas and Damian, ye were shown to be as radiant as beacons, ever illumining the whole world with divine signs, driving away darkness and infirmities by grace, and showing yourselves to be the saviors of all who with steadfast faith celebrate your glorious memory, O all-wise ones.

Glory…, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI—

Boundless is the grace of the saints, which they have received from Christ. Wherefore, their relics continually work miracles by the power of God, and their names, when invoked with faith, heal incurable sicknesses. Through them, O Lord, free us also from the passions of soul and body, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside…”—

The undefiled ewe-lamb, the immaculate Mistress, when of old she beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, exclaimed maternally and, marvelling, cried aloud: “O my Child most sweet, what is this new and all-glorious sight? How hath the thankless assembly betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate and condemneth to death the Life of all? Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word.”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and, Glory…, in Tone VI—

Ever having Christ working within you, O holy unmercenaries, ye work wonders in the world and heal the sick. For your healing is an inexhaustible wellspring: drawn from, it floweth in abundance; and poured out, it gusheth forth, flowing every day in great quantity, granting healing to all, yet remaineth undrained. And those who draw forth from it are filled with healing, yet it remaineth full. What, therefore, shall we call you? Healing physicians of souls and bodies? Curers of incurable sufferings who heal all and have received this gift from Christ the Savior, Who granteth great mercy unto us.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day…”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this strange mystery that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, hanging in the flesh upon the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

O holy unmercenaries and wonder-workers Cosmas and Damian, visit ye our infirmities: Freely ye have received, freely give unto us!

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the unmercenaries, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns I honor the wise unmercenaries”, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us all chant a hymn of victory unto Him Who delivered Israel from the bitter bondage of Pharaoh, and led them dryshod in the depths of the sea, for He hath been glorified.

Illumined by the grace of the ruling Trinity, the two wondrous and honored unmercenaries grant healing unto all who approach with faith, ever pouring it forth.

Taught the mysteries by life-bearing discourse, shining forth like beacons in the world with the fervor of faith, ye easily drive away the darkness of suffering, O most blessed ones.

Submitting to the law of the Savior, O most glorious ones, ye rejected the enjoyment of ­pleasures; and, resplendent most radiantly with virtuous souls, ye achieved preëminence in the world, O right wondrous ones.

*Theotokion:* The all-divine Son Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, and Who made His abode within thy womb, O Mother of God, ineffably clothed Himself wholly in man. To Him do we chant, for He hath been glorified.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy commandments, and illumine me with the light of Thy countenance, for there is none as holy as Thee, Who lovest mankind.

As is meet, let us all hymn the well-springs of healings, the streams of divine gifts, the most splendid receptacles of the immaterial Light.

As benefactors curing sufferings and pangs of body and soul, O most honored ones, ye heal those who have recourse to you now with fervor.

Adorned with the fruits of the virtues, ye manifestly pruned away every corrupting pleasure of life, looking unceasingly toward the beauty of God.

*Theotokion:* He Who before was invisible appeared in our form, O Theotokos, when He united His Godhead to the flesh in thine all-holy womb, O Bride of God.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Beautifully drawing forth streams of miracles from your deep wellspring, with mystical showers ye drive away the dark passions, and grant healings to ailing men. Wherefore, having received the gladness of health through you, O all-glorious ones, we cry out, amazed: O God-bearing unmercenaries, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer, who knewest not man, as the receptacle of the Comforter, O all-hymned one, haste thou and deliver me *—* who am the vile habitation of iniquity and am become in mind the plaything of the demons *—* from their malice, and make me the splendid abode of the virtues. O luminous and incorrupt one, drive away the clouds of the passions and vouchsafe through thy supplications that I may partake of the never-waning light of the Most High.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and, bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, have pity, and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have considered Thy dispensation, O Almighty One, and with fear have I glorified Thee, O Savior.

Manifestly ascending to divine love, O godly ones, ye acquired neither the luster of gold nor silver.

Resplendent with divine miracles, the unmercenaries do good unto all, bestowing grace.

Stretching forth your healing hands, ye showed yourselves to be wise physicians of the pain of sufferings.

*Theotokion:* Let those who do not confess thee to be the Theotokos now be smitten in the face, O all-pure Mistress.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn out of the night, we chant to Thee, O Christ, Who art consubstantial with the Father and art the Savior of our souls: Grant peace to the world, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

As torrents poured forth by God, O glorious unmercenaries, ye pour forth the waters of benefaction upon the faithful, healing infirmities both of body and of soul.

O honored unmercenaries, releasing springs of grace, ye impart health unto all who with faith and love now have recourse to you.

The radiant and most wise stars, who have manifestly rendered the earth celestial, unceasingly illumine us with the likeness of the splendor of the angels.

*Theotokion:* Having conceived the Lord and Savior of the world, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, and given birth to Him, O Virgin Mother, thou hast shown thyself to be more exalted than all things.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Lead me up from the abyss of transgressions, I pray.

Let us fervently honor the godly Cosmas and Damian, the saving healers, the divinely wise benefactors.

Having preserved their chastity, the godly Cosmas and Damian rejoice with Christ, adorned with understanding.

Having lived in oneness of mind and fasted in oneness of soul, together ye have been given to us to grant us healings.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou gavest birth in the flesh to the unapproachable Light Who illumineth the whole world with rays of divinity.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast…”—

Having received the grace of healings, ye extend health to those in need, O all-glorious physicians and wonder-workers. By your visitation cast down the audacity of the enemy, healing the world with miracles.

*Ikos:* The discourse of the wise physicians surpasseth all reason and wisdom and imparteth understanding to all; for, having received the grace of the Most High, they invisibly grant health to all. Wherefore, even unto me hath grace been given to sing of how the God-bearing favorites and ministers of Christ bestow a multitude of healings; for they deliver all from sickness, healing the world with miracles.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

In divine wisdom ye were shown to belong wholly to God, in that ye both contain God; for for God’s sake ye abandoned the world, following divinely in the steps of the Savior, O most glorious ones, honoring the God of our fathers.

O most excellent physicians, with mystical handiwork ye supernaturally heal all the wounds of infirmities, drawing forth saving cures from the divine treasuries and hymning our all-glorious God.

With the crown and radiant purple robe of Thy kingdom, O Christ Master, Thou hast divinely adorned those who loved exceedingly the unapproachable beauty of Thy comeliness, and hast shown them to be universal benefactors of the faithful.

*Theotokion:* When the Orient appeared on earth from on high, O all-pure one, thou wast shown to be the most magnificent and all-radiant gate, illumining the world with beams of purity and ever sending forth rays of miracles upon the faithful.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having died to the beauties of this world and cut off the sickness of avarice, O wise ones, ye have been called unmercenary by all who cry out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ye have most manifestly become partakers of everlasting life; for ye forsook all the beauties of corruptible life, crying together: Bless the Lord, all ye works! Hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

O Master Christ, through the supplications of the unmercenaries deliver us all from grievous ailments, and ever vouchsafe that we may cry to thee together: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Rejoicing, and strengthened by grace, and delivered by thy birthgiving, O pure Virgin Mother, we cry out unceasingly: Bless the Lord, all ye works! Hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thee, the Mother of God, the radiant lamp, the all-wondrous glory more exalted than all creatures, do we magnify with hymns.

With hymns we unceasingly bless the two wise ones who shine forth the radiance of noetic Light and impart enlightenment unto all.

Creating the strength of spiritual health for the faithful, as saviors ye also cure the bodily sufferings presented to you; wherefore, ye are ever hymned.

The beacons of divine radiance, who now without ceasing impart light, noetically illumine the heaven of the honored Church with an outpouring of effulgence.

The two praised ones divinely called by the worshipful Trinity pour forth gifts of healing upon all who ask and bless them with love.

*Theotokion:* With hymns we magnify thee as the Theotokos: the cloud of the Light, the holy ark, the most radiant portal of the noetic Sun.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

Ye have received from God the grace of healing, to cure ailments and heal all who have recourse to your divine temple with faith, O blessed unmercenaries; wherefore, together we bless your honored memory as is meet.

Theotokion—

O all-pure one, thou gavest birth to God, the Word of God, Who doth most wisely accomplish the excellent dispensation of salvation for the world; wherefore, we all fittingly hymn thee as the one who prayeth to Him, that we be delivered from sickness and every misfortune.

On the Praises, 4 stichera—

The composition of Anatolius, in Tone I:

Having received the grace of healings from God, O most comely unmercenaries, ye fervently heal without fee the passions of our souls and bodies. Wherefore, bestowing health upon the faithful through you, Christ showeth you forth to the universe as steadfast luminaries. Him do ye beseech, that our souls be saved.

Drawing forth an abyss of healings from the mind of the Most High, O unmercenaries, ye pour forth healings upon all the faithful; for, supernaturally drawing saving remedies for the suffering of ailments from the treasuries of the Spirit, with mystical therapy ye heal the afflicted. Wherefore, having become temples of the life-creating Trinity, the Godhead manifestly dwelt within you. Pray ye to the Trinity, that our souls be saved.

*The composition of Germanus, in Tone II:* The choir of the saints rejoiceth forever, for they have inherited the kingdom of heaven. And the earth which received their relics emitted a sweet fragrance, for they were servants of Christ, who have made their abode in everlasting life.

O physicians of the infirm, treasuries of healing, saviors of the faithful, most glorious unmercenaries: Heal ye those in pain, who cry out in their affliction, and with Theodota entreat the good God, that we be delivered from the snares of the enemy.

Glory…, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV—

The holy unmercenaries, possessed of a wellspring of healings, grant healing to all in need, for they have been vouchsafed great gifts by Christ the Savior, the ever-flowing Wellspring. For the Lord told you, in that ye are emulators of the apostles: “Behold, I have given you authority over unclean spirits and every disease.” Wherefore, having lived well in His commandments, ye freely received. Freely give also, healing the sufferings of our souls and bodies.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Rejoice, O refuge and confirmation of Christians! Rejoice, ladder of heaven! Rejoice, treasury of virginity! Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou rational ark of divine glory! Rejoice, boast and establishment of the whole world, thou restoration of the fallen, most radiant tabernacle, holy and most comely.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody—

Beholding Christ Who loveth mankind, crucified, O all-pure one, His side pierced by a sword, thou didst cry out, weeping: “What is this, O my Son? How have the thankless people rewarded Thee for the good Thou hast done them? And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and this sticheron, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Behold, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in unity?

The radiant and luminous memory of Christ’s unmercenaries hath shone forth today, shining splendidly with rays of miracles upon all the lands of the earth. Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us celebrate with faith! Come, let us ardently hasten to the relics of the saints, that we may receive speedy healing from them in abundance; for through the activity of the Holy Spirit they grant gifts of healing to all without fee.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Who will not marvel, who will not render glory, who will not hymn with faith the miracles of the wise and all-glorious unmercenaries? For even after their holy repose they richly impart healings unto all who have recourse to them with faith, and their precious and holy relics pour forth the grace of healings. O ye two holy ones! O ye honored ones! O the wisdom and glory which cometh from the grace given you by God! Wherefore, we cry out in hymns to God our Benefactor, Who hath given them to us for the healing of our souls and bodies.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Stavrotheotokion, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs…”—

“O my Child, I cannot bear to see Thee asleep upon the Tree, Who givest wakefulness to all; for unto those who of old fell into the sleep of perdition through eating the fruit of disobedience Thou givest divine and saving watchfulness,” weeping said the Virgin, whom we magnify.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the canon of the unmercenaries.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His land hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §153 \[I Cor. 12: 27-13: 8\]

Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing. Love suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not its own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Love never faileth.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Behold, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in unity?

*Stichos:* For there the Lord commanded the blessing, life for evermore.

Gospel according to Matthew,

§34, from the midpoint \[Mt. 10: 1, 5-8\]

At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: “Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

