The 3rd Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs Acepsimus The Bishop, Joseph The Priest And Aïthalas The Deacon

Commemoration Of The Dedication Of

The Church Of The Holy Great Martyr George, In Lydda, Wherein His Precious Body Was Placed

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” six stichera: three stichera to the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...”—

O most glorious wonder! The comely Acepsimus, the minister to the martyrs, is crowned today with a wreath of hymns. He presenteth us with the suffering to which he was subjected for his worship of God, and doth wound the incorporeal foe. O, what liberal gifts of grace he hath received! Through his prayers save Thou our souls, O Christ, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness.

O most glorious wonder! Joseph hath shone forth from Persia like a star. Destroying the abomination of sorcery by the Spirit, he hath extinguished the ungodly worship of fire with the streams of his blood. O, the strength wherewith he cast down the demons! Through his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, in that Thou art compassionate.

O most glorious wonder! The steadfast Aïthalas, the namesake of a champion of suffering, is shown to be an ever-blossoming garden, which, cut down, doth bloom with wounds, and when slain doth but begin to live. O, the strength of nature which he endured! Through his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, in that Thou art compassionate.

And 3 stichera to the greatmartyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

O passion-bearer George, converser with the angels, dweller with the martyrs, who art ever the refuge of the sorrowful: Be thou a haven of tranquility for me who sail through life, and direct my life, I implore thee, that with unwavering faith I may bless thy supernatural struggles.

Preserve me as I sail upon the sea, as I set out upon the way, and as I sleep at night; and when I am awake illumine my mind, O George, and teach me to do the will of the Lord, that on the day of Judgment I may find remission of the sins I have committed in my life, by fleeing to thy protection, O glorious one.

Arrayed in the breastplate of faith, armed with the shield of grace and the spear of the Cross, thou wast invincible to the adversary, O George. And, having conquered legions of demons as a divine warrior, thou dost hold chorus with the angels; and, entreated by the faithful, thou dost sanctify and save them, preserving them.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Thou didst live in accordance with the meaning of thy name, as is meet, O warrior George; for, taking the Cross of Christ upon thy shoulders, thou didst till well the ground which had been made barren by the deceit of the devil; and, having uprooted the thorns of idolatrous worship, thou didst plant the vine of the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, thou dost pour forth healings upon the faithful throughout all the world, and hast been shown to be a righteous laborer of the Trinity. Pray thou, we entreat thee, for peace for the world and the salvation of our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

Beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, the all-immaculate Theotokos cried out, lamenting maternally: O my Son and my God, save those who hymn Thee with love!

At the Aposticha: Glory..., of the martyrs, the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone VI—

The three children who were preserved unconsumed by the fire in Persia were mystically a foreshadowing of your thrice-radiant oneness of mind and your martyrdom in Christ, O athletes of the ineffable Trinity and the supernatural Unity; for as they braved the flame and did not rail against God, so ye also did not refuse to die, for the love of Christ not sparing your lives. But, as in their midst there appeared a Fourth Who bedewed them, so also Christ, Who is One of the Trinity, hath received them in a place of coolness. O Acepsimus, Joseph and Aïthalas, elect of God, pray ye for our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...” —

Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, she that gave Thee birth cried out: “What strange mystery is this that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou dost die, hung aloft in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs have received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they cast down the tormentors and set at naught the feeble audacity of the demons. Through their prayers save Thou our souls.

Glory..., to the Great Martyr, in the same tone—

O great martyr George, thou victor and champion of kings, as a liberator of captives, a defender of the poor and a physician for the afflicted, entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…” —

Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this strange mystery which I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended upon the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; the canon of the martyrs, with 4 troparia, in Tone IV —

Ode I

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O ye who are most rich, equal in number to the all-holy Trinity, ye were shown to be honorable worshipers thereof, and ye intercede before the throne of the Trinity for those who have recourse unto you, O fervent helpers.

As worshipers of the three-Sunned Trinity, O holy ones, ye destroyed the deception of polytheism, enduring divers torments and an unjust death, O ye blessed of God.

The deep of torment did ye traverse by faith without being capsized, O blessed ones; and ye came to anchor in the harbor of heavenly radiance, in the land of life without grief, to your ineffable joy.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one, thou hast been shown to be the mediatress of joy for us, in that thou didst receive within thyself the fullness of the whole Godhead. Wherefore, together we all call thee the joy of the angels, O thou divinely joyous one.

Canon to the greatmartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “O blessed husbandman of God, I glorify thee,” with 4 troparia, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Thou didst show forth the prosperous husbandry of God, O passion-bearer George, nurturing by thy pious example the faithful who in sacred manner celebrate thy splendid memorial and fervently glorify thee thereon.

Divine love truly inflamed thy heart, O passion-bearer, and, unbidden, thou didst proceed therewith to torment, consuming the deception of polytheism with fire and illumining thy mind with rays of salvation.

Confident as a lion, thou didst confront the tribunal, proclaiming the incarnation of Christ, whereby the world hath been delivered from the ancient fall; and thou didst receive man’s pristine fruitfulness, O thrice-blessed George.

*Theotokion:* Delivering us from our ancient condemnation, the Son of God became, as man, the Son of the Virgin. Wherefore, with Orthodox hearts we glorify Him in two natures and wills.

Ode III

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Not in the lore of Hellenic vanity, O wise ones, but with divine knowledge did ye denounce the godlessness of the Persians, setting at naught their madness.

Illumined with the divine anointing of the episcopate, O sacred Acepsimus, thou didst adorn thyself with the blood of martyrdom, O divinely blessed one.

The crushing of thy limbs, O ever-memorable Joseph, hath utterly crushed the wiles of the deceiver and hath brought thee imperishable glory.

*Theotokion:* Finding thee to be a most pure habitation, the Wisdom of God took flesh of thy blood, yet revealed thee as incorrupt even after thou hadst given birth.

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Joyously renouncing the glories of lineage and homeland, thou didst follow after Christ, O martyr, and hast been shown to be a most comely citizen of the heavenly Sion.

As thou didst show thyself to be the particular heir and dutiful son of the living God, thou didst endure the tormentors’ waves of scourgings, O valiant martyr.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one, He Who alone created man, putting on all of Adam, hath become a new Adam through thee, for the sake of His loving-kindness.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...”—

Thou didst celebrate the mysteries in innocence, O wise one, and thyself becamest an acceptable sacrifice, O divinely blessed one; for with thy fellow athletes thou didst gloriously drain the cup of Christ, O holy Acepsimus, and prayest unceasingly in behalf of us all.

*Ikos:* Who among the faithful can in any wise fittingly hymn the all-wise hierarch Acepsimus, the beacon of Christ? For he hath destroyed the deception of idolatry and hath put the demons’ wiles to shame by the mighty power of Christ God, instructing us piously to worship the all-holy Trinity and to honor the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost in One Godhead; and he prayeth unceasingly in behalf of us all.

Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of wisdom...”—

Joseph, the valiant struggler, Acepsimus, the destroyer of deception, and Aïthalas, the invincible and glorious athlete, the radiant stars, are today truly praised by the faithful in hymns, as is meet. For they did not harbor the deception of the Persians and did not sacrifice to the sun nor worship fire. To them let us cry out with love: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love.

Glory..., that of the great martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb...”—

Disdaining military service on earth, thou didst desire glory in the heavens, O martyr, and didst endure pain and a grievous death. Wherefore, celebrating thy holy memory today, we offer praise unto Christ, O thrice-blessed George.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians: Unceasingly entreat God, to Whom thou gavest birth in manner surpassing understanding and recounting, in behalf of those who hymn thee, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto us that ever glorify thee with faith and love.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd suspended, dead upon the Tree, weeping and crying out maternally, exclaimed: “O my Son, my all-good God, how can I bear Thy voluntary sufferings and Thy descent which surpasseth recounting?”

Ode IV

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Disdaining that which is below and turning their gaze towards those things which alone abide, the valiant Acepsimus and the glorious Joseph and Aïthalas received dwelling places therein; wherefore they are praised.

O mighty martyr Joseph, right wondrous passion-bearer of Christ, during thy suffering thou didst stretch forth thy mind unto Him Who alone is Master, and He eased thine unbearable torments.

Harvested like a fruitful vine, O passion-bearer Aïthalas, thine honored martyrdom poureth forth the wine of compunction upon the faithful, who cry out in gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

*Theotokion:* The holy Theotokos, in whom the Word of the Father, Who is equal in divinity to Him, was well pleased to make His abode, did not lose her purity, nor was she assailed by the pangs of labor; for she gave birth to Emmanuel, God and man.

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Out of love for Thine image Thou didst stand affixed to the Cross, O Compassionate One, and the nations melted away; for Thou art my strength and boast, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

O blessed one, thy body, slain by torture, doth image forth the sufferings of the Word, Who was slain and Who hath given thee eternal life.

Protected by the shield of truth, with thy mighty intelligence thou didst altogether destroy the false contenders, O divinely wise George.

The Word, Who on earth put on our weakness, hath been glorified by thy members. Wherefore, we everlastingly glorify thee, O George.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, He Who gave existence unto men, becoming man Himself, hath granted the possibility of being good unto those who have been corrupted by the disobedience.

Ode V

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Calling upon the great and precious name of the Lord, O Acepsimus, rejoicing, thou didst drain the cup of salvation through sufferings.

The Most High, Who is our Food, hath received thee who wast summoned through wounds, O Joseph, as have the choirs of martyrs with whom thou now makest merry.

O blessed Aïthalas, thou hast truly been shown to be an ever-flowering garden which nourisheth the ends of the earth with the fruits of thy struggles.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one, within time didst thou give birth for us unto the timeless Light, the Effulgence of the Father, becoming a wealth of goodness.

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

Having manfully entered upon the struggle of martyrdom, thou didst put an end unto the audacity of idolatry with thy broken body, O passion-bearer.

In His crown hath the Master set thee as a brilliant gem, thus illumining His Church, O passion-bearer.

Slaughtered like a lamb, thou didst image forth the death of the good Chief Shepherd, and didst offer thyself as an unblemished sacrifice on His altar on high.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Theotokos, from misfortunes, tribulations and the torments which are to come save us by thy prayers.

Ode VI

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

When thy head was severed from thy body, O Acepsimus, thou didst by faith join thy soul to Christ inseparably, ever enlightened by rays of heavenly light.

Slain by stoning like the first martyr, thou didst not deny Christ, the living Rock, O martyr, but passed over to the splendid mansions of heaven.

Beaten mercilessly with staves, thou didst rejoice, possessed of a staff of power, the Cross and boast of the Lord, O passion-bearer Aïthalas, divinely wise and most rich.

*Theotokion:* The bush prefigured the great mystery of thy birthgiving, which surpasseth comprehension, for it was in no wise destroyed by the fire, nor consumed, O all-hymned Virgin.

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Though the vessel of thy body was broken by sufferings, O martyr, thou didst manfully destroy all the evil machinations of the enemy, O most blessed George.

Aflame with the love of God, thou didst in no wise fear the hot irons of the furnace or the blades and wheels which lacerated thy body, O martyr.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, thou wast a holy temple for Him Who resteth in the saints. Wherefore, sanctify us who hymn thee with faith, O Ever-virgin.

Kontakion to the Great Martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “To thee, the champion leader...”—

Having recourse to thine excellent and speedy aid, O athlete of Christ, we, the faithful, pray that they that hymn thee may be delivered from the snares of the enemy and from all tribulation and afflictions, that we may cry: Rejoice, O martyr George.

*Ikos:* Thou art shown to be great among earth’s intercessors, O friend and favorite of the Lord; for, protected by thee, faithful people are ever saved, O glorious one. Wherefore, with faith and love we cry to thee, O much suffering one: Rejoice, thou by whom the world is enlightened! Rejoice, thou by whom the army is made splendid! Rejoice, deliverance of the faithful from captivity! Rejoice, ready aid of the imprisoned! Rejoice, summit of those who fervently have recourse to thee! Rejoice, enricher of those who love thee! Rejoice, for thou art the protection of kings! Rejoice, for thou grantest victory in battle! Rejoice, star which illuminest those who are at sea! Rejoice, ender of all misery! Rejoice, thou to whom all the faithful have recourse! Rejoice, thou by whom the Creator is praised! Rejoice, O martyr George!

Ode VII

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Receiving dew from God amid the fire of torment, ye set the adversaries afire with the flames of your patience, O passion-bearers, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The worshipers of fire are shown to be inheritors thereof, for they tried to compel those who worship the Sun of glory to worship fire, but they cried out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Let Acepsimus, Joseph and Aïthalas, the three beacons of the most honored Trinity, who illumined all the ends of the earth with rays of piety, be honored forever!

*Theotokion:* Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, Whom the hosts of heaven and the assemblies of earth do bless, and Who hath delivered us from the primal curse, O blessed one.

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* The three youths in Babylon, having put to mockery the tyrant’s command, cried out amid the flames: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Thou wast a living sacrifice unto Him Who was sacrificed for us like a lamb; and, strengthened by Christ, thou didst set at naught sacrifices vainly offered to demons.

Thou art shown to be a fruitful branch which doth bear for us the grapes of patience which produce the divine wine which maketh glad the hearts of all the pious.

Thou didst zealously give thy members over to be cut off for Christ’s sake, and, gladdened, thou didst remain inseparable from His love, O all-blessed one, and an heir to all blessings.

*Theotokion:* All creation doth offer praise unto God, Who was born of thine all-pure womb, O all-immaculate maiden, and Who hath delivered us all from the ancient curse.

Ode VIII

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having become abodes of the Word and, through the savagery of the tormentors, bearing the burden of His stripes as though already bereft of life, ye set yourselves against the mindless, O valorous martyrs, being subjected to testing by many torments; yet did ye exalt Christ supremely forever.

O ever-memorable martyrs, mediators of everlasting glory, adorned, ye went joyously forth, and ye loved the path of His testimony, crying out: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Neither fire, nor stripes, nor beasts, nor the sword, nor family, nor death could separate the martyrs from Thy love, O Lord, Thou Wellspring of blessings, Who pourest forth inexhaustible streams of love. Praising them, O Christ, we bless Thee forever.

*Theotokion:* With hymns praising the Theotokos—the Mother who alone knew not man, who alone is the most exalted of all created beings, the all-holy mountain, the golden altar—we cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O George, thou art shown to be the special helmsman of those who sail and a great helper amid tribulations, and thou savest those who have recourse unto thee with faith and an unwavering heart.

Thou hast been shown to be a champion of truth and a denouncer of falsehood, and the confirmation of us that chant with faith, O passion-bearer: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

With the shedding of thy blood thou didst extinguish the burning coals of deception, O George, and didst water the hearts of the faithful who faithfully hymn and keep thy glorious memory.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst spring forth from the root of Jesse and didst uproot the root of malice by putting forth the Author of creation, O maiden. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon to the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Let us praise the beacons of piety and destroyers of deception, the fragrant blossoms of the rational paradise, the honored vessels, the beholders of God’s beauty.

The glowing coal which Isaiah beheld of old did ye receive in your hearts; and illumined by the brilliance thereof, O martyrs, ye set at naught the dark worship of fire.

Adorned, ye now stand before the life-creating Trinity, and, illumined with crowns of comeliness, ye commemorate those on earth who ever keep your memory, O blessed ones.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, who didst conceive the Savior and gavest Him birth in the flesh, save me who am in despair. For, weighed down by the burden of sin, I cry out to thee in pain: Have pity, and help thy servant!

Canon to the Great Martyr

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Radiantly shining forth like the dawn, like the sun thou hast enlightened creation with the unwaning rays of thy sufferings and the manifestation of thy many miracles, O George, joy of martyrs. Wherefore, we bless thee in love.

Thou hast disclosed drops of divine sweetness which take away the bitterness of our passions and ever delight the souls and hearts of those who bless thee with faith, O right glorious one.

With thy blood thou didst hallow the earth and with the spirit of gladness thou hast filled the heavens, O martyr. Wherefore, all the souls of the pious love thee as a favorite of Christ and call thee their sure helper.

*Theotokion:* We offer thee the cry of gladness of the divine Gabriel, crying out: Rejoice, joy of the universe, who gavest birth unto the Abolisher of sorrow, and who hast removed the reproach of Eve! Rejoice, O Virgin, who hast not known man!

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

Unbearable torments did ye endure as if ye were of the bodiless ones, O all-praised Acepsimus, wondrous Joseph and marvelous Aïthalas the deacon, initiates of the mysteries, and the incorporeal hosts are ever amazed at the pain of your sufferings.

Glory..., to the greatmartyr, in the same melody—

Thou didst quench the flames of falsehood with the streams of thy blood, O blessed one, and didst utterly destroy the audacity of thy tormentors; and thou didst glorify Christ, O passion-bearer George. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown of incorruption and life from the right hand of the Most High.

Theotokion—

There is no hope of salvation for me, O Virgin, for I have miserably fallen into the abyss of transgressions and await the menace of dreadful torments and the portion of the goats. But take pity on me before the judgment, for thou art a fervent aid, O Theotokos.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos, and this one of the martyrs, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

O ye holy ones, having steadfastly struggled in piety for Christ, ye put to shame the audacity of the tormentors and cast the summit of idolatry into the abyss, O Acepsimus, Aïthalas and Joseph. And now, holding chorus in the heavens, O crowned ones, pray ye in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., the composition of a Studite hymnographer, in Tone IV —

O brethren, let us spiritually praise the patience of George, the glorious martyr and noetic adamant, who, heated for Christ, was forged by misfortunes and honed by torments, and whose body, corrupt by nature, was laid waste by divers torments. For desire conquered nature, through death forcing the lover to pass on to Christ God, the object of his desire, the Savior of our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

The ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, O Lord, and she marvelled and cried aloud: What is this I see, O my Son most desired? How hath the unbelieving and iniquitous synagogue repaid Thee, which benefited from Thy many miracles? But glory to Thine ineffable condescension, O Master!

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous, He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \(Eph. 6:10-16\)

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel according to Luke, §106 \(Lk. 21:12-19\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men: they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

