The 4th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father

Joannicius The Great

Commemoration Of The Holy Hieromartyr Nicander,

Bishop Of Myra; & Of Hermas The Priest

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…:, 6 stichera: 3 for the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

O thou who wast illumined by light divine, when with purity of mind thou didst lift up thine eyes and likewise preferred things which are to come eternally to things which are inconstant, then, receiving fire in thy heart, O father, like a deer thou didst thirst for love divine; and, unmindful of flesh and blood, thou didst prepare thyself for the struggles of asceticism, for which cause thou didst make the passions of thy body subject to thy soul.

To ascend the mountains of God thou didst make thy dwelling in the heights, without being brought low by the vexing needs of this lowly body, O father Joannicius; for, uniting thyself to the Good One by standing whole nights and days in prayer, thou wast illumined and didst receive the gift of prophecy, to behold things afar off as though they were near, and to foretell to the faithful things which are to come. Wherefore, we glorify thee as a divine teacher.

The assaults and darts of the demons thou didst mightily blunt with the entreaties of thy prayers, and by the power of God, O right glorious one, thou didst triumph over them. Wherefore, as thou wast refreshed by the humility of thy heart, the Good One hath given thee miracles as honors. For this cause, thy precious relics pour forth fragrant myrrh, for thou hast shown thyself to be the sweet fragrance of Christ, O father Joannicius.

And 3 stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Receiving a fitting name through divine providence, O father, thou didst confirm it, signifying it materially; for in thine endurance thou didst vanquish multitudes of adversaries and the assembly of torturers. Wherefore, receiving a crown of victory, thou didst cry out with faith: Glory to Thine ­invincible might, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

On this, thy divine memorial, thou pourest forth the most fragrant myrrh of healings upon us today, O wise Nicander; thou drivest away the darkness of sorrows and bodily sufferings, and fillest with rich grace the assembly of all who cry out to Christ: Thou art the inexhaustible myrrh making fragrant all who hymn Thee!

As thou hast boldness before Christ, Who alone is glorious in His saints, entreat Him, O venerable Nicander, in behalf of all who with love celebrate thy memory and praise thy corrections, that through grace we may become partakers of His ineffable good things and incorruptible glory.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward for thy labors in the heavens. Thou didst destroy hordes of demons and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this strange sight that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest on the Tree, suspended in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

At the Aposticha, the stichera of the Octoechos; and, Glory…, idiomelon, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Joannicius our father; for by thy steps we have truly recognized how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them pray thou to the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

Beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering willingly, the Virgin, Thy Mother, O Master, cried out: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost unjustly endure wounds, O Physician Who healest the infirmity of men and hast delivered all from corruption by Thy loving-kindness?”

Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst cultivate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold. Thou wast a beacon for the whole world, resplendent in miracles. O Joannicius our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…: Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV—

In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Nicander received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos; and two for the saints, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thee, the emulator of the Forerunner”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Illumined by the light of grace, O venerable Joannicius, enlighten those who with faith celebrate thy memory, and by thy supplications deliver them from the darkness of sin.

Without turning back thou didst tread the path which leads to the heavenly city, O Joannicius, for the Holy Spirit guided thee, resting in thy heart.

Thou wast possessed of exalted humility, O Joannicius; wherefore, we entreat thee: Take pity on our lowliness, O venerable one, and ease all the pangs of our hearts.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, as thou art the restoration of the fallen and strengthening of those who stand fast, I entreat thee: Set aright my mind, which hath fallen through sin, that I may glorify thee, O Mistress.

Canon of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

The most sacred Church of Christ is now adorned with hymns, celebrating with sanctified hymns in sacred manner the honored feast of the honored athletes and hieromartyrs today and honoring them.

Anointed with the precious oil of the priesthood, O hierarch Nicander, by faith thou didst render it yet more precious with the dye of thy blood, crying out in joy: Let us chant to our God, for He hath been glorified!

Running the course of martyrdom and manifestly showing true gladness therein, ye were enriched with the grace of miracles and heavenly gifts, crying out together, O martyrs: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

*Theotokion:* Christ, Who is uncircumscribable in the bosom of the Father is circumscribed in the flesh in His Mother’s womb, preserving her a true Virgin even after she gave birth in manner past understanding. To Him let us cry aloud: Let us chant to our God, for He hath been glorified!

ODE III

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Thou didst exchange transitory things for things which last, consciously taking up thy cross, O Joannicius, and ascending unscaleable mountains like the great Elijah, thou didst abide there.

The path which thou didst greatly desire was shown thee by two of the fathers, whom thou didst find hiding in the mountains for many years, O blessed one who wast illumined with the gift of prophecy.

Beset by divers passions, we flee with faith to thy protection, O Joannicius. With thy holy mediation visit us all, entreating Him Who loveth mankind.

*Theotokion:* With the sprinkling of thy mercy, O divinely joyous Virgin, extinguish the burning coals of my passions, and having quenched them, light the lamp of my heart, O most immaculate one, thou golden lampstand.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Like a barren woman hath the Church of the nations given birth, and she could scarce bear the great assembly of children. Let us cry out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, O Lord!

Spreading out noetic nets, by working miracles thou didst catch those who dwelt in falsehood, bringing them as a great offering to Him Who shone forth from the Virgin, O Nicander.

Thou wast a most fruitful branch of the plant of Titus, the enlightener of Crete, O blessed Nicander, bearing the noetic grapes which exude for us the sweetness of salvation.

With the godly Hermas ye cultivated stony hardened hearts with the plough of the Cross, O wise ones, and showed them to be fertile through grace. Wherefore, ye are blessed.

*Theotokion:* Even a heavenly intelligence is unable to describe thy birthgiving, which passeth understanding, O Maiden; for thou didst conceive in thy womb the primal Mind Who hath formed all things by His word.

Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having banished the darkness of the passions and truly received the light of the commandments of Christ, thou didst shine forth in fasting; and having mortified the body, thou didst live in the Spirit and trample the snares of the enemy underfoot, O blessed one. Wherefore, through the grace of the Spirit thou hast become a companion of the angels on high. O Joannicius our father, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Truly illumined with the divine anointing of the truth of the hierarchy and with the truly sacred blood of martyrdom, O glorious ones, ye have joined the ranks of the incorporeal angels, rejoicing. Wherefore, we celebrate your honored memory, praying that, through your supplications, O saints, cleansing may be given to all.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, thou didst restore the dead nature of mortals, which had become corrupt in the passions; and thou hast raised up all from death to a life of incorruption. Wherefore, as is meet, we all bless thee, O all-glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.

Stavrotheotokion—

O all-immaculate Virgin, Mother of Christ God, a sword passed through thine all-holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His own will. O blessed one, cease thou never to entreat Him, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode IV

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God*—*the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin*—*the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Reaching the loftiest of mountains, thou didst bring low the upraised heads of the demons by thy humility, O wise one, and didst manfully contend against them, O thou glory and confirmation of monastics.

Armed with the fear of Christ as with a two-edged sword, thou didst noetically and sensibly bring down the apostate serpent, O blessed one glorified by sacred victories.

Wholly enkindled by the divine Spirit, O father, thou didst endure the cold, dwelling in the wilderness for many years, seeking the Lord, Who kept thee warm by grace divine.

*Theotokion:* With faith I fall down and entreat thee, the cleansing of all mortals: Render thy Son the Judge merciful to me, that I may glorify thee as is meet.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

Ye showed yourselves to be the chariot of the Word, bearing Him noetically; wherefore, bound to horses and cruelly dragged by them, ye did not deny Him, nor were ye vanquished, manifestly impelled toward the path of heaven.

Cast into prisons and weighted down with chains, ye saved the city and men from the bonds of falsehood and have been bound with the bond of love for Him Who was bound in the flesh for our sake, O most blessed ones.

Imprisoned, the most glorious ones glorified the Master with the angels, and were given heavenly bread to eat. Wherefore, they paid no heed to the pangs of the flesh, since they were mightier than wounds.

*Theotokion:* He Who is awesomely seated upon a lofty throne, having become a babe doth sit in His Mother’s arms, restoring His fallen image and granting deification to the descendants of Adam.

Ode V

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

O venerable one, thou didst tread the narrow and onerous path with heartfelt divine ascents, manifestly enlarged through visions and deified by adoption. Wherefore, thou hast become the confirmation and adornment of monastics.

O venerable Joannicius, thou abode of God, the grace of prophecy, which cleanseth the eye of the mind, was given to thee, to behold the things of the future as though they were present, and things afar off as though they were nigh at hand.

Deliver me from the pangs of sins and sorrows, ease thou the pain of my heart, and grant me remission of my falls into sin, for thou hast God our Benefactor hearkening to thine honored supplications.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the defections of my heart, O most immaculate one, cure thou the passions of my soul and drive away the darkness of despondency, that I may praise thee in hymnody, O ever-blessed and most hymned Theotokos.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the gloom of transgressions, O Good One, granting us Thy peace.

Thou didst lead the people into the enlightenment of the Faith, O Nicander, and, having forsaken the darkness of the madness of idolatry, they became children of the light through Thy mediation.

Shining with the enlightening rays of the Spirit, ye passed through the night of tortures, dispersing the darkness of ungodliness, O glorious luminaries.

Full of the waters of Paul, Titus gave thee drink, showing thee to be a river inundating the swollen streams of ungodliness, O Nicander.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who gavest birth to the Lamb and Lord in the flesh, O only undefiled tabernacle, divine ark and precious lampstand: Illumine thou my soul.

Ode VI

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Causing the passions of the body to wither away, thou wast seen to be a tree of lofty stature bearing wondrous fruits and precious corrections in a most sacred manner, O divinely blessed one.

Through the appearance of the martyr Eustathius did the Lord cure thee who hadst been given most deadly poison to drink by the hand of an unrighteous man, and wast in peril of death, O most blessed one.

Though infirm of body, O Joannicius, thou didst undergo myriads of pangs; wherefore, I cry to thee with faith: Ease thou the pain of my heart.

*Theotokion:* O thou who art the help of all, help us who are in peril. Extend thou thy hand unto us, and lead us to the havens of salvation, O Maiden full of the grace of God.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

The bodies of the martyrs, pierced with nails, were seen to emulate the sufferings of the Savior Who was nailed to the Cross and hath saved the world from corruption.

By the guidance of the holy and omnipotent Spirit, O martyrs, ye passed over the deep of torments and, full of glory, reached the divine harbor.

O ever-memorable hierarch Nicander, true to thy name thou didst vanquish all the opposition of the slayers of men, and, standing before God, hast received crowns of glory.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden, thou didst destroy the reproach of our first mother, having given birth in the flesh to Him Who hath crowned us with blessings; and thou hast transformed her sorrow into true joy.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “ To the chosen…”—

Thou wast made manifest as a most radiant star, shining forth in the world and bringing light to those in the gloom of the passions. And thou hast been shown to be a most mighty physician. But as thou hast received the grace of healing, grant healing unto those who ask it of thee, that we may chant: Rejoice, O father Joannicius!

*Ikos:* O wondrous father Joannicius, thou hast been shown to be another physician and intercessor for those held fast by sickness and sorrows, healing all who flee beneath thy divine protections with faith. Wherefore, hearken thou to such things from us: Rejoice, O scion of the root of a good father! Rejoice, O goodly offspring of thy mother! Rejoice, thou who didst set aside their love! Rejoice, thou Who didst accept God alone! Rejoice, for thou didst leave an earthly army! Rejoice, for thou didst cast down the pride of the barbarians! Rejoice, O thou Who wast a rampart and protector for kings! Rejoice, thou who wast revealed as a weapon and tower of defense for the world! Rejoice, thou who dost bring to nought the battles of the heathen! Rejoice, O beacon resplendent with miracles! Rejoice, thou who dost clothe the naked! Rejoice, deliverer of captives! Rejoice, O father Joannicius!

Ode VII

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Thou didst make thy heart a dwelling-place of the Trinity, and having built three churches, O Joannicius, by divine grace thou dost pour forth myrrh therein, unto the enlightenment and purification of those who approach thee with faith.

Thy soul, ever illumined by the effulgence of the divine Spirit and rendered wondrous by prophetic foreknowledge in sacred manner, O blessed one, looked upon the assemblies of the souls who approached thee with faith.

By thy holy supplications, O blessed one, do thou quickly deliver me from the afflictions of soul and body which beset me, and cause me to chant: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O divinely joyous one who alone gavest birth to the immutable Lord, O pure one, pray thou, that by His right hand He turn toward higher things my mind, which hath been sorely crippled by the griefs of life.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Staining thy sacred vesture in the dye of thy blood, O blessed Nicander, thou didst render it resplendent, but cried: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Drawing nigh to the fire with unwavering love for the Creator, O blessed ones, ye were not consumed, crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

The flame of the furnace, prepared for your torture, ye transformed into dew through the all-accomplishing Spirit, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin, ineffably thou gavest birth to the incarnate Word Who delivereth from death those who cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Standing high upon a mountain, like a lamp set upon a lampstand, O venerable one, thou didst illumine the thoughts of all with faith, pointing out most excellently the path of life by word and deed, and leading them to the summit of dispassion by thy divine discourse.

Thou didst converse with the Lord Almighty, Who cleansed thy mind by dispassion, O venerable one; and, taught ineffable things by Him, thou didst give utterance beforehand in prophecy, illumining men’s souls, O most blessed one, in that thou art greater than the prophets; wherefore, we, the faithful, praise thee together.

Grievous wounds have afflicted me and divers infirmities vex me. Deliver me from them, I pray thee, O father Joannicius, in that thou hast received from God the grace to heal sufferings and ease the pain of the faithful.

*Triadicon:* Hymning the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Trinity, the uncreated Godhead, the one Dominion, Power and Monarchy, with all the hosts on high let us cry out in joy: Holy, Holy, Holy!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the angels, having ineffably given flesh unto God. Him do thou entreat, O most immaculate Mistress, that by the exaltation of humility I may in mind transcend the carnal passions and hymn thy great grace.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O Nicander, thou wast an honorable hierarch who entered into the temple on high with thine own blood, not another’s, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Praising the priests of the Lord at the tribunal, and adorned with the blood of martyrdom, the glorious Hermas crieth out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having performed holy rites before in sacred manner, ye showed yourselves to be honorable sacrifices, and offered yourselves to the Lord as a fragrance of sweet savor, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin who gavest birth to the Deliverer and Lord, the Abyss of compassion: Dry up the abyss of mine evils, for to Him do we cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Thou wast strengthened when God made thy mind steadfast to restrain the passions, O father, and thus thou becamest an angel in the flesh and livest forever with the angels in the heavens, standing before the throne of glory, filled with never-waning light.

Thou madest thine abode amid mountains and caves as in heaven, O venerable Joannicius; therefore, the wild beasts were tame before thee who hadst subdued the passions of thy soul, which are subjugated only with difficulty, and becamest righteous. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith.

Lying in the tomb, thy sacred and holy relics ever drown infirmities and burn up hordes of the demons through the grace of God, O wise Joannicius, and they ever pour forth healings upon all who bless thee with faith.

Drawing nigh unto Christ with greater clarity and purity, O Joannicius, be thou mindful of those who commemorate thee with faith, asking that we be forgiven our sins, delivered from all sickness and given a place in the kingdom of heaven.

*Theotokion:* O pure one who gavest birth to the Light, illumine the eyes of my soul, lest the most heavy darkness of sin come upon me and the depths of despair cover me. Save me and guide me to the haven of the will of God.

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Patiently enduring dismemberment and burning with torches on the tree, O wise martyr Nicander, thou didst receive the dew of heaven from the hand of an angel, and by thy life-bearing supplications didst show men to be consumed as with fire.

Stripped naked, ye were seen to be an awesome sight; and, bound to irrational beasts, and dragged to and fro over the ground by them, O athletes, ye were yet shown to be whole; and though plunged into the fire, ye were not consumed, but were preserved by the divine Spirit.

Today the sacred metropolitan see of Myra doth celebrate aloud, summoning every city to gladness on this, your memorial, O most praised ones, whereon ye completed your sacred contest.

Heaven was opened to you, the angels clapped their hands at your ascent, the ranks of the venerable and the righteous rejoiced, and the martyrs leapt for joy. Dwelling with them, O saints, be ye mindful of those who keep your memory.

*Theotokion:* Illumine me with thy light, O most immaculate one who gavest birth to the unapproachable Light; drive the clouds from my soul; rescue me from darkness, I pray, and vouchsafe unto me divine salvation, O only all-pure Ever-virgin.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

The grace of God abounded in the soul of thee who lived like one of the incorporeal ones, O wise Joannicius; wherefore, deliver those who honor thee from the dark clouds of the passions, leading them to the calm harbor and repelling the hordes of the demons.

Theotokion—

Through thee hath the preëternal Son truly wrought great things, with the counsel of the Father; for without pain thou gavest birth to Life incorruptible, and, escaping the pangs of maternity, even after giving birth thou didst remain a virgin, as thou wast before childbirth.

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and, Glory…, in Tone VI—

Having preserved the image of God intact, and by fasting set thy mind above the pernicious passions, thou didst mightily ascend to the Master in accordance with His likeness; for, manfully constraining thy nature, thou didst strive to subject that which is more base to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou hast been revealed as a summit of monastics, a desert-dweller, an instructor of those who run the good race, a most renowned model of the virtues. And now in the heavens thou dost clearly behold the Holy Trinity, the reflections having been abolished, O Joannicius our father, and dost pray immediately for those who honor thee with faith and love.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside…”—

A sword passed through thy heart, as Symeon said, O all-pure Mistress, when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee at the ineffable word of the archangel uplifted upon the Cross, condemned by the iniquitous, given vinegar and gall to drink, His side pierced by a spear, His hands and feet transfixed by nails; and, lamenting, thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: “What is this new mystery, O my Child most sweet?”

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213

\[Gal. 5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly rejoice.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §10

\[Mt. 4: 25-5: 12\]

At that time, there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened his mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

