The 5th Day of the Month of November

The Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs

Galacteon and Epistemis

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel..: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

Nurtured on the milk of faith, thou didst attain maturity in Christ because of thy many torments and tribulations, O Galacteon, having become an acceptable sacrifice and a perfect immolation through thy voluntary hastening to martyrdom, O thou who art most rich. O thy firm and steadfast faith, whereby thou didst receive God, O thou who art now deified most perfectly!

Artfully didst thou seek for the Wellspring of good things most earnestly desired, and with the splendors thereof thou didst illumine soul and mind, O thou who art blessed of God; and with mighty opposition thou didst cast down the ancient tyrant of great craft, O much suffering martyr Epistemis, thou divine adornment of monastics.

The two all-radiant luminaries of the noetic East shine forth with grace and piously illumine all creation with the transcendent splendors of their sufferings and the divine flames of healings. And honoring their most splendid feast, we glorify Christ Who illumineth all for their sake.

Glory…, Now and ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone & melody—

Rejoice, enlightenment of souls, forgiveness of sinners, correction of the negligent! Rejoice, consolation and joy, and helper of the sorrowful! Rejoice, O good one, thou healing of the souls of the weak! Rejoice, reconciliation with God and mediatress, O pure one who art more holy than all the seraphim!

Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, O Master Jesus, Thy Virgin Mother cried out; “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou dost unjustly endure wounds, O Physician Who healest the infirmity of men and in Thy loving-kindness deliverest all from corruption?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Christ, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they cast down the tormenters and set at nought the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and this canon to the holy martyrs, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “It is fitting to hymn the unconjugal pair of athletes”, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto Christ, Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea, and led Israel over to dry land, for He hath been glorified forever.

Standing with joy before the life-creating Trinity, O most blessed one, illumined with radiant lightning, do thou ask forgiveness for those who celebrate thy holy memory.

Having set thy soul afire with the Holy Spirit, thou didst consume the carnal passions by fasting, and didst extinguish the fire of ungodliness with the streams of thy blood.

Having set aside family, wealth and power for the sake of Christ, and taken up thy cross, O venerable one, with the blessed Epistemis, thy spouse, thou didst struggle monastically in a God-pleasing manner.

*Theotokion:* O all-hymned Theotokos, helper of the sorrowful, salvation and hope of the hopeless: Pray thou earnestly that we be delivered from misfortunes.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Lord Who in the beginning established the heavens and founded the earth upon many waters, make me steadfast for the chanting of Thy glorification.

She who gave thee birth brought thee forth from her barren womb like a day-star dispelling the night of ungodliness.

Held fast by the purity of love, thou didst teach thy spouse to live in virginity with thee; and having suffered lawfully with her, O martyr Galacteon, thou hast been glorified.

Behold a woman who through divine revelation learned all the trials of the torturers before they took place, and cast down the tormentor.

*Theotokion:* O Maiden who gavest birth to the Life Who hath destroyed all the power of death, make me live who have been slain by harmful passions.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV; Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Having adorned the visage of thy soul with fasting, thou enlightenest the faithful with the rays of thy sufferings, O blessed Galacteon. Wherefore, piously celebrating thy holy and light-bearing day with faith, we cry out to thee: As thou hast boldness before God, pray that we be saved!

Glory…, Now and ever…: Theotokion—

By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, thou hast renewed the mortal essence of the earthborn which becometh corrupt in the passions, and thou hast raised up all from death to the life of incorruption. Wherefore, as is meet, we all call thee blessed, O all-glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.

Stavrotheotokion—

O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of Christ God, a sword passed through thine all-holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His own will. Him do thou never cease to beseech, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* O Word, with divine vision the prophet perceived Thee Who wast to become incarnate of the Theotokos alone, the mountain overshadowed; and with fear he glorified Thy power.

Ye showed yourselves to be reason-endowed sheep manifestly following your Shepherd, the King of all, and ye frolic with the martyrs in the heavenly fold, O crown-bearers.

Ye were shown to be an chosen team, ploughing the furrow of an honorable and valiant martyrdom; and ye cultivated the grain which is laid up in the granaries of heaven.

Your noses, heads, nails and hands cut off for Christ, O valiant ones, ye uprooted the falsehood of ungodliness and were shown to be victors.

*Theotokion:* The tongue of mortals is not worthy to hymn thee fittingly as the Theotokos, O most immaculate and all-pure one who hast been shown to be the refuge of Christians.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Having nurtured thyself on fasting as with milk, O Galacteon, thou didst attain unto the perfect fullness of the sufferings of Christ.

Taken up far above to the resting-place of the saints, O Epistemis, thou didst see with cleansed mind.

O venerable martyrs, ye have received a habitation with the martyrs in the highest and have obtained immortal glory.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth in time to the Timeless One Who became man, that He might save man, O all-pure one.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Through the laver of divine enlightenment ye approached those who wed not, being afterwards most perfectly baptized by blood, O athletes.

Having enlightened thy soul with the great harshness of fasting, thou didst show it forth as comely with the light of suffering, O Galacteon.

Having mounted the chariot of your blood, O martyrs, ye reached the way of heaven, wherein ye rest.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the Son Who is equal in honor with the Father, O thou who knewest not wedlock, and in manner past understanding thou didst feed the Nurturer of all with milk.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Having struggled splendidly, ye were reckoned among the legions of Christ’s martyrs which fought valiantly, O glorious Galacteon, with Epistemis, thine honored spouse, who suffered with thee. Unceasingly entreat the one God in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, Who by Thine Angel didst save the youths from the fire and transformed the thundering furnace into dew!

O Epistemis who wast wedded to the Word of God, thou didst smite the unbelievers with blindness who tried to strip thee naked, and didst show them to be children of the light when they repented.

Utterly refusing to sacrifice to inanimate gods, as honorable sacrifices ye offered yourselves to our true God, the Master of souls, O martyrs.

Cast into the fire of torment, O wise martyr Galacteon, thou didst quench the flame of ungodliness with torrents of blood, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* With all the ranks of heaven on high, in a loud voice we who have been saved by thee call thee blessed, O Maiden Theotokos.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The unoriginate King of glory, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Being equal in purity and equal in fasting and suffering, O valorous athletes, ye have received equal gifts from God.

Desiring the life of the angels, ye maintained your union incorruptibly, and with them ye joyously join chorus as is meet, O passion-bearers of the Lord.

Standing manfully before the tribunal, O martyr, thou didst preach the one true God, and didst destroy the arrogance of polytheism.

*Theotokion:* O ye people, let us hymn the one Mother who after giving birth remained Virgin, as the precious and most exalted throne of the Lord Most High.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving, O Ever-virgin, which was revealed to the law-giver on the mountain in the fire and the bush, for the salvation of us, the faithful, do we magnify with unceasing hymnody.

Thou hast been shown to be a tower of heaven, the foundation of the Church, a pillar of piety, and the confirmation and divine adornment of martyrs and fasters, O divinely wise Galacteon.

Amid the flowers of virginity thou didst blossom like a rose, spreading thy fragrance like a lily in the valleys of martyrdom, O Epistemis, thou virgin martyr of the Lord. Wherefore, together we call thee blessed.

Illumined with the light of the three-Sunned splendor, ye have now passed on thereto, having been shown to be children of the Light. Pray ye, O martyrs, that He grant enlightenment unto those who praise you with faith.

*Theotokion:* Thou art our sword and rampart, O Theotokos! Thou art the help of those who have recourse to thee! We move thee now to prayer, that we may be delivered from our enemies.

