The 6th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints,

Paul The Confessor, Archbishop Of Constantinople

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

The divinely eloquent Paul layeth his hands on thee, O most blessed one, as his namesake and emulator, adorned with his character and piety and his endurance of evil circumstances, and aflame with his zeal, O champion of Orthodoxy. With him thou art now glorified in the mansions of heaven. *Twice*

With the strong cords of thy dogmas thou didst strangle the ungodly Arius and the impious Macedonius; and with thy right discourse on doctrine thou didst make multitudes of the Orthodox steadfast, O hieromartyr and father. Wherefore, accepting thine all-radiant confession, He Who loveth mankind hath shown thee to share in His kingdom. *Twice*

With a splendid wreath of righteousness hath Christ crowned thee, O blessed hierarch who finished thy race and kept the Faith; and He hath adorned thy confession, O right wondrous one. Wherefore, having received a heavenly inheritance, pray thou to the Savior in behalf of those who hymn thee.

O most blessed Paul, namesake of confession, as intercessor for those who fervently praise thee, deliver us from all misfortune and every sin, from the tempest of the passions and tyranny, in that thou art an invincible martyr and a right acceptable hierarch, O father; for thou hast acquired boldness before Christ our God.

Glory…, the composition of Germanus, in Tone I—

Arrayed in hierarchal vestments, O venerable father, thou didst emulate thy namesake Paul: having endured persecution and tribulations, in thy constant pangs thou didst put to shame the pernicious opinions of Arius; and having suffered for the unoriginate and consubstantial Trinity, thou didst cast down the ungodly Macedonius, the opponent of the Spirit, and, having made the Orthodox Faith clear unto all, thou dwellest with the immaterial angels. With them pray now, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

Beholding Thine unjust slaughter, O Christ, weeping, the Virgin cried out to Thee: “O my Child most sweet, how is it that Thou diest unjustly? How is it that Thou hangest upon a Tree, Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the waters? Leave me not alone, O greatly merciful Benefactor, who am thy Mother and handmaiden, I pray!”

At the aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and this sticheron, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O venerable father Paul, invested with virtue by Christ God, strengthened by the Faith thou didst valiantly conquer every horde of demons and barbarians, and didst establish thy flock upon a rock, unassailed by any heresy. Wherefore, joining chorus with the angels, pray thou to the Savior, that our souls be preserved in peace.

Glory…, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II—

Sailing the deep of fasting with the sail of abstinence, thou didst escape the storm of the passions, O venerable one. Wherefore, as the namesake of the divine Paul, thou didst endure persecution and tribulations, maltreated amid the blasphemies of the heretics. Wherefore, thou didst cast down the opinions of Arius, and, vanquishing the heresy of Nestorius, thou wast shown to be a zealot of the Church of Christ. Him do thou entreat, O blessed hierarch, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb led of His own will as a man to the slaughter, she said, lamenting: “Dost Thou now haste to leave me childless, who gave Thee birth, O Christ? Why hast Thou done this, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

Troparion, in Tone III—

By thy confession of the divine Faith the Church hath shown thee to be another Paul, a zealot among her priests; and Abel crieth out to the Lord with thee, as doth the righteous blood of Zachariah. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that we be given great mercy.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the saint, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I most wisely hymn Paul, the teacher of the mysteries”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

We proclaim thee, O Paul, to be the confirmation of the Faith, a teacher of the Church, an unshaken pillar of confession, a greatly luminous lamp of grace and the mouth of the fiery Spirit.

Paul the most great, the sun of the whole world, setteth thee, a second Paul, forth as a fire mightily consuming heresies and as a scythe which moweth down ungodliness.

Thou didst contend lawfully, O divinely eloquent one, bearing the brunt of the divine battle of preaching; and as a faithful hierarch thou didst strangle with the cords of thy dogmas the vain-minded Arius like a wild beast.

*Theotokion:* Come, let us hymn the all-pure Mary, who alone hath adorned the human race, gave birth to God incarnate, and hath remained a virgin intact.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Adopted through grace divine, O Paul, following the dogmas of the God-bearing Paul thou didst not presume the nature of the only-begotten Son to be a created being.

With mouth, heart and tongue thou didst preach the wisdom and power of God, the hypostatic Word, O divinely wise and venerable Paul, denouncing the ungodly Arius.

O most wise one, thou didst preach God Who in essence is all-creating and omnipotent, through the righteous judgment of the transcendent authority of the Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are deified.

*Theotokion:* The Word of the unoriginate Father Who is beyond any beginning, hath now received a beginning, incarnate, from thee, O pure one; and He Who transcendeth all time hath come under time.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III—

Holding fast to the dogma, thou didst reject ungodly words, O divinely wise Paul, putting Arius to shame; for, making the faithful steadfast, thou didst preach the Son as of one essence with the Father. O venerable Father, entreat Christ God, that we be granted great mercy.

Glory…: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

As the namesake and emulator of the chosen vessel, O father, thou didst endure tribulations and persecution for the Faith; and like him, thou didst also go to Rome, everywhere preaching that all the Persons of the Trinity must receive equal adoration. Wherefore, having reached the end of thy course in Armenia, thou didst receive from the Lord a crown, as is meet, putting to shame Macedonius and the ungodly Arius. Therefore, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All of us, the generation of men and angels, bless thee as the Virgin who, alone among women, gavest birth without seed to God in the flesh; for the Fire of the Godhead dwelt within thee, and thou didst nourish the Creator and Lord with milk as a babe. Wherefore, we, the generation of angels and men, glorify thine all-holy birthgiving as is meet, and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy birthgiving.

Stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Deliverer upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: “The world rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the loving-kindness of Thy mercy. O long-suffering Lord, abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of mercy, have pity and grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God—the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin—the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

With His life-bearing right hand the Creator hath set upon thy head the crown of confession as a most precious honor, in that thou wast victorious, O divinely manifest and blessed Paul.

In that thou didst struggle beforehand for the sake of the dogmas of piety, O most wise one, thou hast received rewards, having now attained unto the Tree of life, O divinely manifest, blessed and wondrous Paul.

As a splendid struggler and champion of the truth, O most honored Paul, thou hast been vouchsafed to join chorus in the land of heaven, where the feet of the meek dance in chorus.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to save humanity, O Savior, as the Son, visibly consubstantial with the Father, thou wast incarnate of the Virgin in a form consubstantial with us.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Thou didst bring the pasturage and corruption of heresy to an end, O divinely wise father, applying a most excellent remedy: thy splendid confession of thy dogmas, which is pure beyond understanding, and thy divine zeal.

The grace of the Holy Spirit was poured forth in abundance in thy lips, O most blessed one, truly finding thee to be a mighty and all-excellent champion of Orthodoxy for the faithful. Wherefore, thou hast illumined the councils of the godly.

Thou didst fell the blasphemy of Arius and Macedonius with the sling of thy divinely inspired dogmas and doctrines, O Paul, as David did the Philistine, and, having first strangled them, thou didst cast them down utterly.

*Theotokion:* The timeless and unoriginate Word hath now come under time, receiving animate and noetic flesh from thee, O pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock, granting peace to all who hymn thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Arius, who uttered blasphemy against the highest and belittled the Son and Word of God as a creature, hath been damned, anathematized by thee, O divinely wise one.

The mindless, foolish and ungodly Macedonius, who rejected the Spirit of God, O father, hath been cast down by thy mighty opposition, O divinely manifest one.

The creeping serpent who spawned a horde of heresies is slain by thy vivifying words, O most blessed hierarch of God, most sacred and divinely eloquent one.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, we hymn thy birthgiving and undefiled purity, which transcend nature; for in thee did virginity and an incorrupt birthgiving wondrously meet.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

O Paul, who shone forth upon the earth like a star of heavenly splendor, thou dost now enlighten the universal Church for which thou didst suffer, laying down thy life. And like that of Zachariah and Abel thy blood crieth out to the Lord.

*Ikos:* Thou didst receive thy name from on high, and thy birth from the earth below, O Paul; and ripe as a comely garden, thou didst blossom forth like a garden in fasting, perfuming all with the sweet scent of the labor of thy manifold struggles, thy sweat, imprisonment, starvation, thirst and all thy tribulations. Therein thou didst successfully pass on, adorned with a wreath of victory, for thy blood crieth out to the Lord.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Thou hast passed over to the tabernacles of heaven, O divinely wise and venerable one, and, drawing nigh unto God, deified by communing with Him, thou hast become divine, chanting: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Made wise by thy words, O most lauded Paul, we learn to worship the indivisible and inseparable Godhead in three Suns, and to the Trinity do we chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Having purified thy most sacred, divine and God-pleasing confession like gold, with gladness thou didst offer thyself to God as a right acceptable sacrifice, O venerable one, emulating the suffering of our Savior.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be the only mediatress of divine deliverance for all men, having given birth to the Deliverer of all, O most immaculate one. To Him do we all chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Springs of thy dogmas gush forth and water the whole Church, O father; and with thy precious blood thou hast hallowed all who follow thee in the Orthodox Faith and cry out: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having thrust aside the threefold waves of life thou hast now anchored in the calm harbor; for thou didst have the Lord, Who createth all things by His hand, as thy helmsman, steering thy passage, O most lauded Paul. Him do we exalt supremely for all ages.

Dwelling within thee, the thrice radiant light of the all-divine Trinity hath shown thee to be a secondary luminary which enlighteneth the council of the Orthodox and darkeneth the horde of the heretics, O father, who dost chant: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Following the words of the prophets, O Virgin, we proclaim thee to be the Theotokos; for thou gavest birth to the Child named Emmanuel, Who is more ancient than all things. To Him do we now cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

My whole self do I offer to thy godly protection, O divinely eloquent one, for, having received from Christ, as a hieromartyr, the authority to loose transgressions, save me by thy supplications and illumine me with divine light, cutting away the bonds of mine offenses.

Thou hast been shown to be a new Paul aflame with zeal, in that thou hast now heard ineffable words in paradise; for thou sharest his character, having shared also his name, O most excellent father Paul, and receivest a most magnificent crown in the kingdom of Christ.

Thou hast been shown to be a temple, a denouncer of every heresy and a godly champion of Orthodoxy, O most glorious hieromartyr Paul, manifestly illumined with rays of grace and filled with the light of the uncreated Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Clad in flesh He received from thee, O most immaculate one, the Word dwelt, incarnate, in the world, in that He is compassionate; and suffering no diminution, in that before He was incorporeal, with His divine power He cast down the one who from of old hath tormented all.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

Set afire with zeal by thine ardent heart, thou wast shown to be a spiritual champion of grace and didst cut down the assembly of the heretics with the sword of thy words, O holy hierarch; and, having finished thy race, thou hast earned a place with the multitude of the martyrs.

Theotokion—

Thou wast an all-immaculate Bride and a most honored temple of an ineffable pregnancy, O Theotokos; for the preëternal Light made His abode within thee, and thou gavest birth to the Word of God. Hymning thy birthgiving, O most immaculate Maiden, we magnify thee as is meet.

Aposticha stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory…, in Tone VII—

Thou didst penetrate to the depths of the Spirit, living on earth like one of the incorporeal beings; and from thence thou didst draw forth a wealth of divine knowledge and hast enriched men by thine Orthodox teachings, O venerable father.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion—

The ewe-lamb, the Virgin, seeing her Lamb stretched out upon the Tree between two thieves, cried out: “Woe is me, my sweet Child! What is this strange and all-glorious mystery that I see? How hath the iniquitous assembly nailed Thee to the Cross and given Thee vinegar to drink, Who didst feed men with manna?”

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes: 8 troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the saint’s canon.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon their beds.

*Stichos:* Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the church of the saints.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318, from the midpoint \[Heb. 8: 3-6\]

Brethren: Every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity that this Man have somewhat also to offer. For if He were on earth, He should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests who offer gifts according to the law: who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, “See,” saith He, “that thou make all things according to the pattern shown to thee on the mount.” But now hath He obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also He is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Gospel according to Luke, §64 \[Lk. 12: 8-12\]

The Lord said: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: But he who denieth Me before men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him who blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

