The 7th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The 33 Martyrs In Melitene

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father

Lazarus The Wonderworker,

Who Struggled In Asceticism On Mount Galesius

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

As is meet, O right glorious ones, ye were truly shown to be a divinely assembled regiment, a sacred army, a godly company, a holy nation, a legion of martyrs inspired by God, a comely gathering, an unbreakable alliance, inhabitants of the city on high. Wherefore, ye are called blessed, as is fitting.

Assembling together, let us all honor Nicander and Hesychius, Athanasius and Mamas, the divine Barachius and Callinicus, Theogenes and Nicon, Longinus and Theodore, Valerius and Xanthius, Theodulus, Callimachus and Eugene, the godly Theodochus and Ostrychius.

Together let us hymn with faith the true witnesses: the valiant Hieron, the glorious Epiphanius, Maximian and Ducitius, Claudian and Theophilus, and the godly Gigantius, Dorotheus and Theodotus, Castrycius, Anicetas and Themelius, as well as Eutychius.

And 3 stichera for the venerable one, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Having set aside all the folly of the passions and made thy flesh subject to thy spirit, thou didst become a rule of virtue, the confirmation of monastics, a model for fasters, the adornment of the venerable. And now thou dost behold the ineffable beauty of thy Creator, ever nurtured by the Spirit on the beauties of heaven. Wherefore, having assembled, we celebrate thine honored and most festive memory in hymns, with sweet songs.

Thou didst cut off all the heavy burden of matter and the greatly riotous tumult of the flesh, and, controlling thy breathing, O wise one, thou didst remain unaffected by the passions, strong as a pillar, through spiritual armor and valorous mind. And now thou hast truly received the divine vision and splendor, and hast taken thy place before Him Whom thou didst desire, delighting in His never-ending radiance, deified by thy posture.

Loving the light, like Elijah and John the luminary, thou didst observe stillness in the mountains and arid deserts, ever learning divine ascent and excelling in the way of the virtues. Wherefore, thou hast attained thine ultimate desire, O all-wise one, and, rejoicing, dost stand before the thrice-radiant light of the Trinity; and receiving divine splendor directly therefrom, thou prayest with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone V—

O venerable father, thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst free thy soul and body from the passions and didst prepare thyself to be a dwelling-place of the Spirit; and Christ, coming with the Father, made His abode within thee. As thou art a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity, O great preacher Lazarus our father, pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

The ewe-lamb, beholding her Lamb hastening to the slaughter, followed quickly, crying out to Him these things: “Whither goest Thou, O Jesus, my Child most sweet? Wherefore, O Long-suffering One, dost Thou run this rapid course so straight? O sinless Jesus, greatly Desired One, most merciful Lord: grant speech unto me, Thy handmaid. O my compassionate Son most beloved, pass me not by in silence who gave birth to Thee in strange manner. O most compassionate God, grant great mercy unto the world!”

Aposticha from the Octoechos. Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward for thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed legions of demons, attained unto the ranks of the angels and blamelessly emulated their life. As thou hast boldness before Christ, entreat peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

The Virgin, Thy pure Mother, beholding the most iniquitous men who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, O Savior, was wounded in her womb as Symeon foretold.

Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they cast down the tormenters and destroyed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

Glory…: troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

With prayerful vigils and outpourings of tears didst thou water thy pillar, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit a hundredfold, and wast a shepherd, granting the petitions of all. O Lazarus our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos with 6 troparia, and two for the saints with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer this praise to the wise martyrs”, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Having joined the divine hosts of heaven, O right victorious martyrs, ask cleansing for all who praise your radiant memory.

Desiring to tread the path of martyrdom with splendor, ye mightily endured all the threefold waves of torture, strengthened by the Holy Spirit.

Ye were shown to be luminaries upon the earth, dispelling the darkness of polytheism, O divine athletes. Wherefore, ye have received the never-waning light.

*Theotokion:* He Who createth all thing by His gesture and hath crowned the athletes who likewise trampled down the foe, is incarnate of thee ineffably, O pure Mother.

Canon of the venerable Lazarus, the acrostic whereof is “I chant entreaty unto thee after God, O thrice-blessed one”, in Tone II—

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Come, ye faithful, and, rejoicing with faith and godly spirit, let us praise the divine Lazarus, crying out to Him: O blessed one, deliver us from misfortunes by thy supplications.

Though thou didst not desire it, God caused thee to return again to thy native land; wherefore, by thy supplications save me who ever pursue the passions.

The radiant and divinely bestowed love which shone forth richly in thee, O God-bearer, caused thee to lay down thy life zealously for thy neighbor.

*Theotokion:* From all wrath and tribulations do thou save us who bow down before thy holy image and confess thee with faith to be the Theotokos, O most immaculate Theotokos.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

With thy sacred precepts, O glorious and divinely blessed Hieron, thou didst train the sacred martyrs for the divine contest and didst most gloriously cause them to pay no heed to the torments.

Crushed by a tree, O holy ones, ye emulated the precious suffering of the all-good Master and with the grace of the Almighty crushed the pernicious deceivers.

Setting your hope upon the Lord of all, O martyrs who behold God, ye were in no wise moved from your great stand, but lawfully finished the divine race with upright character.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O pure Mistress, Maiden of great renown, who gavest birth unto the infinite Word Who became circumscribed by the flesh, confessing Whom the choir of the martyrs suffereth most mightily.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Establish us within Thee, O Christ, who cry aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and confirmation!

Fortified by divine strength, O wise one, thou wast delivered from savage beasts. Wherefore, entreat Christ, that He deliver from noetic beasts those who hymn thee.

Strengthened by the power of Christ, O venerable one, thou didst manfully endure the hunger, privation and oppressiveness of the desert in the hope of ineffable sweetness.

Protected by divine grace, O most blessed one, thou didst escape the assaults of the hostile spawn of Hagar, saved for the benefit of many.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the Master of all, O pure Virgin, in manner ineffable and past describing. Him do thou entreat, O most hymned one, that He rescue those who hymn thee from the dominion of the passions.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

With gladness the Church of Christ doth glorify thee in psalms as a luminary most great. Wherefore, cease thou never to beseech Christ, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto all.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Having shown mighty courage, O wise ones, ye foiled the most malicious snares of the enemy, preaching Christ at the tribunal. Wherefore, when ye were beheaded, ye were crowned by the right hand of God, O thirty-three blessed inhabitants of Melitene. O honorable martyrs, be ye mindful of us who honor you with faith.

Glory…: sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Possessed of divine intelligence, O venerable one, thy heart exchanged earthly things for things divine and lasting; and thou joinest chorus with the angels, delighting in immaterial light and rejoicing unceasingly. Wherefore, O venerable one, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O thou who alone art the all-pure Virgin Mother, who dost surpass the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy prayers, O pure one, cleanse me who above all others am dust and have defiled myself with carnal transgressions; and grant me great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding the One Who sprang forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

With the rays of divine struggles, ye most gloriously enlighten all the ends of the universe and drive away the darkness of the invisible foe, O ye who are most rich. Wherefore, with pious intent we celebrate your radiant and divine solemnity.

Having completed the contest, having given your own blood for Him Who suffered and shed His divine blood willingly on the Cross for our salvation, O ye who are one in mind, ye have all been vouchsafed equal honor. Wherefore, we call you blessed.

Now let us praise the wise martyrs Theogenes and Mamas, Hieron, Claudian, Nicon and Nicander, Longinus and Hesychius, Barachius, the great Callinicus and the godly Xanthius, Theophilus and Valerius.

Most wisely hastening to the struggle, O right glorious ones, ye found the divine grace of the Deliverer which accomplisheth all things, and ye right wisely endured all manner of tortures, chanting unto Christ with thanksgiving: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* The shadows of the law and the visions of the prophets proclaimed thee of old to be the Mother of the Deliverer; and, beholding thee, O most immaculate one, we now chant unto thee together, O glory of passion-bearers and strength of the holy martyrs.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; for Thou comest to me, seeking me who have strayed. Wherefore, I glorify Thy great condescension toward me, O greatly Merciful One.

As thou didst spurn all transitory things, passionate attachments and love, O venerable one, having ever set all thy hope on God, that which thou acquired did the hands of the poor receive.

Turning aside the malice of the demons through the onslaughts of wild beasts, O venerable and blessed one, thou didst remain in no wise touched thereby, protected by the grace of God Who doth ever aid thee in all things.

Seeing thy love and gratitude towards God, O venerable one, the most wicked one sought to weaken thy strength. Wherefore, he set dogs upon thee; but his wiles were shown to be in vain.

*Theotokion:* I hymn thee, O Mistress Theotokos, and cry out to thee: Preserving me, sanctify me by thy supplication, and guide me to salvation who have fallen through many sins and am beset by the assaults of the demons.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Let us praise the wise athletes who manfully completed the course, honoring Maximian and the godly Eugene, Theodore and Ducitius, Callimachus, Theodulus and Dorotheus.

The valiant warriors who were voluntarily slain and crushed have inherited everlasting immortality and join chorus now in the spaciousness of paradise, having received blessed hope.

Having spurned the slumber of indifference, O most lauded ones, with godly vigilance ye raced each other during your contest, the course of the divine faith of martyrdom, and have now arrived at the refuge of heaven.

*Theotokion:* O most lauded Mistress who hast loosed the bonds of hades by thy divine birthgiving: Loose me who am bound with the bonds of transgressions, I pray thee, and set my feet upon the paths that lead to life.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Hoping to cast down the steadfastness of thy soul and the firmness of thy resolve, O venerable one, the evil one transformed himself into a dog, and thus came to vex thee.

In great dearth of confusion the enemy departed, O blessed one, seeing thee in nowise affected, who moreover bore want with thanksgiving.

Ever wielding the Cross in thy hands like a mighty pestle, O venerable one, thou didst grind all the activity of the enemy’s wiles into dust.

*Theotokion:* Save me from every assault of enemies visible and invisible, O all-hymned Mother of God, thou hope of the despairing and intercessor of the faithful.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

In hymns let us bless the athletes Theodotus and Hilarion, the wise Gigantius and Athanasius, and the divine Eutychius and Epiphanius.

In thy faith let the valiant martyrs of Christ be blessed: Hieron and Diodotus, the wise Castrycius and the godly Ostrychius, the great Themelius and Amonitus.

Having drowned the invisible Pharaoh and all his army in the outpouring of your blood, O right victorious martyrs, ye reached the heavens and have adorned the Church of the firstborn.

*Theotokion:* The weaponry of the enemy was rendered useless, O Theotokos, from the moment when Christ, to Whom thou gavest birth, was pierced by the spear, edifying with blood and water those who have become worn out.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* From the belly of the sea monster, Jonah cried out: Lead me up from the abyss of hell, I pray, that with a spirit of truth and in a voice of praise I may sacrifice to Thee, as to my Deliverer!

Desiring to show thy heart to be a temple for God, O venerable one, thou didst go about the churches of the saints, from whom thou didst abundantly receive the grace of the Holy Spirit as confirmation for many.

Thy native land received thee back as a priceless treasure through the judgment of God, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, make me, who am a stranger to the homeland of Eden, to be an heir thereto, O venerable one.

The church of the virgin-martyr Marina first received thee as a tenant, and therein thou didst shine forth like a never-waning star, shedding light upon those who sleep in the darkness of ignorance, O venerable one. .

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate Virgin, entreat thy Son and Lord in behalf of thy servants who ever venerate the precious image of thy countenance with faith; for thou art able so to do.

Kontakion of the martyrs, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As firstfruits…”—

The radiant choir of martyrs, the luminous company, descending to us noetically, hath illumined the Church today with wondrous rays. Wherefore, celebrating their honored memory, we ask of Thee, O our Savior: through their supplications deliver us from misfortunes, that we may chant unto Thee: Alleluia!

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Seeing thy precious hand severed for the truth, O glorious Hieron, thou didst cry out hymns of thanksgiving unto Him Who seeth all things, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

With great sense thou wast the model for thy fellow sufferers, O glorious Hieron, and with them thou hast received a portion in the kingdom on high, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

As valiant warriors of the eternal King, with the sword of your courage ye destroyed the legions of the deceiver, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* As thou gavest birth to the Physician, O pure Virgin, heal thou the sufferings of my heart and deliver me from everlasting torment who cry out in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The youths of old showed themselves to be rhetors with the greatest love of wisdom; for, theologizing with their lips, they chanted from the depths of their God-pleasing souls: O most divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou didst prepare an abundant feast, replete with thy goodly divine virtues; and nurturing all therewith, thou didst teach them to chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Following the words of thine all-wise teachings, and having with true zeal set aside the love of all transitory things, men chose dwelling with thee to be something good, O most blessed one.

Having acquired the manner of thy life from the wondrous Symeon, thou didst stand unsheltered upon thy pillar, firm as stone, crying out in gladness: O most divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* By thy mediation save me from the snares of the enemy, O pure one, and to the ultimate love of thy good Son bind me who am ever driven away from Him by wicked pleasures.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having died to the world, ye inherit the life which is to come and pour forth the grace of healing upon those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; exalt Him supremely forever!

Revealed by the rays of your sufferings to be splendid luminaries, ye illumine the world, O martyrs and passion-bearers, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Cast into prison, O truly divine preservers of the truth, your flesh scourged pitilessly with leather thongs, O blessed ones, ye in no wise strayed from the straight path. Wherefore, ye have received crowns of victory.

*Theotokion:* As one holier than the angels, O pure one, thou didst receive the God of all Who resteth in the saints. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, hymn and glorify thee for all ages.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Truly studying the struggles and feats of the fathers who fasted before thee, O father, thou didst strive to show thyself their successor; and thou didst not only do so, but even surpassed them.

Thou didst fulfill the supplication wherewith thou didst entreat God of old, O thrice-blessed one, offering thy bread unto all and saying: O Lord of glory, Thine own of Thine own do we offer unto Thee for all ages!

Directing those with thee toward the divine path by word and deed, O father, and being thyself directed thereto far more than they, thou didst perform miracles for them; for God increased the harvest through thy supplications.

*Theotokion:* Let heaven rejoice! Let the earth and men be glad! For the Virgin Mary hath ineffably given birth unto the Creator of all, to Whom we chant: We exalt Thee supremely, O Christ, forever!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Strengthened by divine power, O all-wondrous Hieron, with strength of mind thou wast able to vanquish the greatly devious one, and thou didst lead to Christ an assembly of athletes by thy teachings, with whom we ever bless thee with faith.

Ye were shown to be an honorable army assembled in Christ, O ye of great renown; and ye opposed the powers of the prince of this world. And having vanquished them with the sword of the divine faith, in gladness ye received crowns from the hand of the Author of life.

Rise up, O Melitene, bringing to the Almighty a goodly assembly of honored martyrs, whose city is on high, since they have completed the sacred race! And with all cities ever bless them with faith.

O Christ, Thou never-setting Sun, through the supplications of Thy glorious martyrs illumine the rays of splendor and sanctify those who celebrate their radiant and divine martyrdom, and, as Thou art God, vouchsafe us to share in the kingdom on high.

*Theotokion:* I tremble before Thy coming judgment, O Thou Who alone art King, and am afraid lest I be cast into suffering and torment. But cleanse me of all defilement of sin through the supplications of Thine all-pure Mother, in that Thou lovest mankind.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Woe is me! I have led a life of sloth and fear the dread judgment! Yet, O Lord Who lovest mankind, at the entreaty of Lazarus send me torrents of tears, that I may thereby wash away the filth of my transgressions.

Possessed of a calm soul, O father, thou didst likewise have a suitably meek countenance, O wise one, wholly manifest as consoling to all, and watering men’s souls with streams of thy words. Beseech Christ that He grant this tranquility also unto us.

Desiring to reveal the most manifest and divine virtue plainly to all, O venerable father, God prompted thee to approach the wild mountain, from whence thou didst illumine the whole world, readily emitting rays of life.

*Theotokion:* Show forth thy Son, to Whom thou gavest birth without seed, as a merciful Judge when He shall seat Himself upon the holy throne, as it is written, to judge all mortals for the wicked things they committed during their life, O Maiden.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Protected by the sword of Thy precious Cross, O Word, Thine athletes mightily vanquished the adverse powers and put the tyrant to shame. They suffered for Thee, and reign together with Thee, O my Christ, Thou King of all.

Glory…: Exapostilarion of the venerable one: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—

Let us all praise with hymns the ever-memorable Lazarus, the God-bearer and emulator of the Master, who with the power of God destroyed the savagery of the demons.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Thee did Daniel describe beforehand as the unquarried mountain from whence the precious Stone was cut, which crushed the temples of the idols, O Mary Theotokos.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, §213 \[5: 22-6: 2\]

Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, §10 \[4: 25-5: 12\]

At that time, there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened his mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

