The 8th Day Of The Month Of November

Synaxis Of The Archangel Michael,

Commander Of The Heavenly Host,

And The Archangels Gabriel, Raphael, Uriel, Salaphiel, Jegudiel, And Barachiel, Together With The Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Authorities, Powers, Six-Winged Seraphim, Many-Eyed Cherubim And The Other Bodiless Powers

If the temple be dedicated to St. Michael and all Angels, or if the pastor so desireth, a vigil is served.

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...”—

O ye incorporeal angels who stand before the throne of God, luminous with the brilliance thereof and everlastingly shining with radiance. As secondary luminaries, entreat Christ, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O immortal messengers of the truly incorruptible Life, ye most blessed ones who received life from the first Life, ye have become holy beholders of the eternal Wisdom, full of light, and reflecting lamps shown forth as is meet.

O ye archangels and angels, principalities, thrones, dominions, six-winged seraphim, and divine, many-eyed cherubim, instruments of wisdom, virtues and powers most divine. Pray ye to Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory..., in Tone IV—

Commander of the angelic choirs, standing in the heavens before the throne of the three-Sunned Godhead, and richly illumined with the divine rays of light which are ceaselessly emitted therefrom. Deliver from the darkness of the passions us on earth that joyously chant the thrice-holy hymn, and enlighten us with radiance, O Michael, supreme commander, intercessor for our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

The angelic hosts, O Christ, which stand before Thy throne, pray for the human race. Wherefore, at their entreaties, do Thou cast down the audacity of the pagans, bestowing peace upon all the faithful.

*Stichos:* He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

O ye ranks of angels, who ever hold chorus about the throne of the King of all. Preserve us who call upon you with faith, and deliver us all from torment.

*Stichos:* Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His hosts.

The Father, God Who is over all, brought forth the only Word and the Spirit, and the hosts of heavenly intelligences, formless and immaterial, that hymn His three-Sunned glory.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion, in the same melody—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! we cry to thee in company with Gabriel, for, having received the first Joy from on high, thou hast filled us all with joy.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Supreme commanders of the heavenly armies, we, the unworthy, do ever entreat you, that by your prayers ye surround us with the protection of the wings of your immaterial glory, preserving us who earnestly fall down before you and cry aloud: Deliver us from misfortunes, in that ye are the leaders of the hosts on high.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first Antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera, 4 in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

Revealing thyself as a most radiant intercessor before the three-Sunned Godhead, O Michael, supreme commander, with the heavenly hosts thou criest out, rejoicing: Holy art Thou, O Father! Holy art Thou, O Word Who art equally without beginning! Holy also art Thou, O Holy Spirit! One glory, one kingdom, one nature, one Godhead and power. *Twice*

Thy visage is fiery, and thy beauty wondrous, O Michael, chief among the angels! For in thine immaterial nature thou dost traverse the ends of the earth, fulfilling the commands of the Creator of all, acknowledged as mighty in thy strength, making thy temple a wellspring of healings, honored in thy holy calling.

Thou hast made Thine angels spirits, as is written, and Thy ministers a flame of fire, O Lord. And Thou hast appointed Michael supreme commander, preëminent among the ranks of Thine archangels, who is obedient to Thy commands, O Word, and with fear giveth utterance to the thrice-holy hymn unto Thy glory.

And 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast given a sign...”—

The preëternal Mind appointed thee as a secondary luminary, O Gabriel, which hath enlightened the whole universe with divine communions, revealing to us the truly divine and great mystery which was hidden from before time began, of Him Who, though incorporeal, was incarnate in the Virgin’s womb, and became man, that He might save man. *Twice*

Standing before the throne of the three-Sunned Godhead, and richly illumined by the rays of divine light which are continually emitted therefrom, deliver from the darkness of the passions those who on earth joyously join chorus and praise thee, and illumine them with thy radiance, O Gabriel, supreme commander, intercessor for our souls.

Set at naught the fury of the Moslems who oft descend upon thy flock. Cause thou the schisms of the Church to cease. Still the tempest of countless temptations. From misfortune and tribulation deliver those who honor thee with love and take refuge under thy protection, O Gabriel, supreme commander, intercessor for our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Rejoice with us, all ye captains of the angels, for your chief and our intercessor, the great supreme commander, appearing today in his honored temple, doth most gloriously sanctify it. Wherefore, singing praises as is meet, we cry out to him: Protect us in the shelter of thy wings, O most great Archangel Michael.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Rejoice with us, all ye choirs of virgins, for our intercessor and mediatress, our protection and great refuge, doth comfort the sorrowful today in her honored and divine temple. Wherefore, singing her praises as is meet, we cry out: Protect us by thy divine intercession, O all-pure Mistress Theotokos.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

Reading from The Book of Joshua

And it came to pass, when Joshua was in Jericho, that he looked up with his eyes, and a man standing before him, and there was a drawn sword in his hand; and Joshua drew near and said to him: “Art thou for us, or on the side of our enemies?” And he said to him: “I am now come, the chief captain of the host of the Lord.” And Joshua fell on his face upon the earth, and said to him: “Lord, what commandest thou thy servant?” And the captain of the Lord’s host said to Joshua: “Loose thy shoe off thy foot; for the place whereon thou now standest is holy”

Reading from The Book of Judges

And it came to pass in those days that the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and the children of Israel made for themselves because of Midian the caves in the mountains, and the dens, and the holes in the rocks. And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord because of Midian. And an angel of the Lord came and sat down under a fir-tree, which was in Ephratha in the land of Joas father of Esdri; and Gideon his son was threshing wheat in the wine-press, in order to escape from the face of Midian. And the angel of the Lord appeared to him and said to him: “The Lord is with thee, thou mighty in strength.” And Gideon said to him: “Be gracious with me, my Lord; but if the Lord is with us, why have these evils found us? and where are all His miracles, which our fathers have related to us, saying: ‘Did not the Lord bring us up out of Egypt?’ And now He hath cast us out, and given us into the hand of Midian.” And the angel of the Lord turned to him, and said: “Go in this thy strength, and thou shalt save Israel out of the hand of Midian: behold, I have sent thee.” And Gideon said to him: “Be gracious with me, my Lord: whereby shall I save Israel? behold, my thousand is weakened in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father’s house.” And the angel of the Lord said to him: “The Lord shall be with thee, and thou shalt smite Midian as one man.” And Gideon said to him: “If now I have found mercy in thine eyes, and thou wilt do this day for me all that thou hast spoken of with me, depart not hence until I come to thee, and I will bring forth an offering and offer it before thee.” And \[the angel\] said: “I will remain until thou return.” And Gideon went in, and prepared a kid of the goats, and an ephah of fine flour unleavened; he put the flesh in a basket, and poured the broth into a pot, and brought them forth to him under the turpentine-tree, and drew nigh. And the angel of God said to him: “Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and put them on that rock, and pour out the broth close by.” And he did so. And the angel of the Lord stretched forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened bread; and fire came up out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened bread; and the angel of the Lord vanished from his sight; and Gideon saw that he was an angel of the Lord; and Gideon said: “Ah, ah, O Lord my God! for I have seen the angel of the Lord face to face!” And the Lord said to him: “Peace be to thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.” And Gideon built there an altar to the Lord, and called it The Peace of the Lord, until this day as it is still in Ephrata of Esdri.

Reading from The Book of the Prophet Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: All the earth crieth aloud with joy: the trees also of Lebanon rejoice against thee, and the cedar of Lebanon, saying: “From the time that thou hast been laid down, no one hath come to cut us down.” Hell from beneath is provoked to meet thee: all the great ones that have ruled over the earth have risen up together against thee, that they have raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. All shall answer and say to thee: “Thou also been taken, even as we. and thou art numbered amongst us. Thy glory hath come down to hades, and thy great mirth: under thee they shall spread corruption, and the worm shall be thy covering. How shall Lucifer, who rose in the morning, fallen from heaven! He who sent orders to all the nations is crushed to the earth! But thou didst say in thy heart: “I will go up to heaven, I will set my throne above the stars of heaven: I will sit on a lofty mount, on the lofty mountains toward the north: I will go up above the clouds; I will be like the Most High.” But now thou shalt go down to hell, even to the foundations of the earth. They who see thee shall wonder at thee, and say: “This is the man who troubled the earth, who made kings to shake; who made the whole world desolate, and destroyed its cities; who loosed not those who were in captivity. All the kings of the nations lie in honor, every man in his house. But thou shalt be cast forth on the mountains, like a loathed carcass, with many dead who have been pierced with swords, going down to the grave. As a garment defiled with blood shalt not be pure, so neither shalt thou be pure; because thou hast destroyed My land, and slain My people: thou shalt not endure forever, thou—an evil seed.

At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone I—

*The composition of Cyprian:* O supreme commander of the noetic powers that stand unceasingly before the throne of the Master. Pray ye to the Lord, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

*The composition of Arsenius:* Michael, preëminent among the divine ranks, commander of the hosts on high, who ever walketh with us and preserveth us all from every assault of the devil, hath today summoned us to a festival. Come, therefore, ye that love the feasts of the Church and Christ, and taking up the flowers of the virtues, with pure thoughts and an upright conscience let us honor the assembly of the archangel; for, standing unceasingly before God, chanting the thrice-holy hymn, he prayeth that our souls be saved.

*The composition of the Studite, in Tone II:* O ye supreme commanders, that govern the immaterial essence of the noetic hosts, and shed light upon the whole universe with rays of glory of the threefold Sun. With never-ceasing utterance ye chant the thrice-holy hymn. Wherefore, pray ye that our souls be saved.

*Another sticheron by Arsenius, in the same tone:* O ye noetic beings, divine and incorporeal, who surround the immaterial throne, with lips of flame ye chant the thrice-holy hymn to God the Ruler: Holy is God, the unoriginate Father! Holy is the Mighty One, the Son Who is equally without beginning! Holy is the Immortal One, the Spirit one in essence, Who with the Father and the Son is glorified.

*The composition of Anatolius:* With incorporeal lips and noetic mouths the ranks of the angels offer unceasing hymnody to Thine unapproachable Divinity, O Lord, and the pure intelligences and ministers of Thy glory, and with them Michael the incorporeal and Gabriel the exceeding magnificent, praise Thee, O Lord. And the supreme commanders of the angels, preëminent among the powers on high, have today become our hosts, commanding us to chant the hymn of hymns unto Thine unapproachable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind, which they entreat unceasingly in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., in Tone IV—

With lips of fire the cherubim hymn Thee, O Christ God, and with incorporeal mouths the choir of the archangels doth continually glorify Thee. And Michael, the commander of the hosts on high, doth unceasingly offer a hymn of victory to Thy glory; for he hath lighted our way to a radiant festival today, that, with lips of clay, we may fittingly give utterance in psalmody to the thrice-holy hymn of praise, for all things have been filled with Thy praise, and therefore Thou dost grant the world great mercy.

Now and ever..., the composition of George of Nicomedia, in the same tone,—

Today the Theotokos, the temple which containeth God, is led into the Temple of the Lord, and Zechariah raiseth her aloft. Today the Holy of Holies rejoiceth and the choir of angels doth mystically keep festival. Celebrating with them today, let us cry out with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord, Who hath great mercy, is with thee!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

Keeping festival in the world angelically, let us give utterance to a hymn to God Who is seated upon the throne of glory: Holy art Thou, O heavenly Father! Holy art Thou, O Word co-everlasting! Holy also art Thou, O all-holy Spirit!

*Stichos:* He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

Preëminent with great boldness among those of heaven, and standing in glory before the dread throne, O Michael, supreme commander, beholder of ineffable things, by thy supplications save us who are in want, misfortune and temptation, we beseech thee.

*Stichos:* Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His hosts.

Thou art the first among the incorporeal angels, the minister of God’s divine radiance, a beholder and initiate of the divine mysteries, O Michael, supreme commander. Save us who piously honor thee each year and hymn the Trinity with faith.

Glory..., Now and ever..., in Tone VIII, the composition of John the Monk—

O supreme commander, in that thou art captain and champion, princely leader of the angels, from all want and sorrow, infirmity and grievous sin do thou free those who faithfully hymn and entreat thee, O glorious one; for as thou art immaterial, thou dost manifestly behold the Immaterial One, and art illumined with the unapproachable light of the glory of the Master Who, in His love for mankind, took flesh of the Virgin for our sake, wishing to save mankind.

Troparion of the angels—

Supreme commanders of the heavenly armies, we, the unworthy, do ever entreat you, that by your prayers ye surround us with the protection of the wings of your immaterial glory, preserving us who earnestly fall down before you and cry aloud: Deliver us from misfortunes, in that ye are the leaders of the hosts on high. *Twice*

and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice...,” once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the angels, twice; Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion “The mystery hidden from before the ages...”

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

Standing ever before the dread throne, illumined with the brilliant rays of the three-Sunned Godhead, dispelling the gloom of sin, enlighten us who celebrate your assembly with splendor; and pray ye earnestly that we be delivered from misfortune, O most radiant intercessors.

Glory..., in the same tone: Spec. Mel: “The choir of angels...”—

The choir of angels, having the divine Michael as supreme commander, doth with him offer hymnody unto the Holy Trinity, for the Creator of all, by a word, brought forth out of non-existence the host of the fiery ranks.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the heavenly hosts unceasingly entreat God to Whom thou didst give birth, in manner beyond comprehension and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “When Thou didst descend...”—

Thou hast been revealed as foremost among the legions of the angels, O Michael, supreme commander. Unceasingly entreat the King Most High, that He cast down the pride of tyrants here below. And as thou hast boldness at the fiery throne, pray for us, thy servants, without ceasing.

Glory..., in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before...”—

The cherubim and seraphim, the many-eyed hosts of ministering archangels, together with the virtues, thrones, dominions, angels, powers and principalities, entreat Thee, our Creator, God and Master, that Thou disdain not the supplication of sinful people, O most merciful God.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O all-immaculate Virgin, who gavest birth to the transcendent God, with the incorporeal ones unceasingly pray that He grant remission of transgressions and correction of life before the end unto those who with love hymn thee as is meet, O thou who alone art all-praised.

After the Polyeleos, this Megalynarion to the bodiless hosts—

We magnify you, O archangels and angels, and all the hosts, cherubim and seraphim, which glorify the Lord.

Or this Megalynarion—

We magnify you, O archangels and angels, principalities, virtues, thrones, dominions, powers, cherubim and awesome seraphim, who glorify the Lord.

The Selected Psalm—

A I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart;

B And before angels will I chant unto Thee,

A Who maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

B Bless the Lord, all ye His angels.

A Bless the Lord, all ye His hosts.

B Worship Him, all ye His angels.

A Thou Who sittest on the cherubim, manifest Thyself.

B The angel of the Lord will encamp round about those who fear Him.

A By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established,

B And all the might of them by the Spirit of His mouth.

A And He mounted upon cherubim and flew.

B With glory and honor hast Thou crowned him.

A Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest.

B Praise Him, all ye His angels.

A Praise Him, all ye His hosts.

B Let every breath praise the Lord.

Glory..., Now and ever...

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII:

Having worthily become, at the command of thy Creator, the master of the ranks of heaven and minister of divine glory, thou art a saving mediator for Christians, watching over those who are on earth with thine immaterial glory. Wherefore, we all praise thee as is meet, hymning thy divine festivity today. O Michael, supreme commander, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy feast.

Glory..., in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before...”—

The ranks of angels stand with fear before Thy throne, O Master, Christ God, and, ever illumined with rays therefrom, they unceasingly chant to thee a hymn of victory. Through their sacred prayers do Thou grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O pure and immaculate Virgin Mother, who knewest not man, who alone gavest birth within time to the timeless Son and Word of God. With the honorable bodiless hosts of heaven beseech Him to grant us cleansing of our sins and great mercy.

Song of Ascents, in Tone IV, the first Antiphon.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

*Stichos:* Praise the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou art become exceeding glorious.

Let every breath praise the Lord!

Gospel according to Matthew, §52 \(13:24-30, 36-43\)

The Lord said this parable: “The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in his field: but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and said unto him: ‘Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares?’ He said unto them: ‘An enemy hath done this.’ The servants said unto him: ‘Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?’ But he said: ‘Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn.’” And His disciples came unto Him, saying: “Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.” He answered and said unto them: “He who soweth the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one; the enemy who sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend, and those who do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.”

Glory..., Through the prayers of the archangels...

Now and ever..., Through the prayers of the Theotokos...

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Thine angels, O Christ, standing in fear before the throne of majesty, ever illumined by Thine effulgence, Thy chanters of hymns on high, and the ministers of Thy counsel sent down by Thee from on high, bestow illumination upon our souls.

Canon to the Theotokos, in Tone VIII, with six troparia, including the Irmos, which is chanted twice; and two canons to the incorporeal hosts, with a total of eight troparia, also in Tone VIII.

Ode I

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

O most pure Theotokos, who in manner transcending nature gavest birth to the eternal and most divine Word, thee do we hymn.

O Christ, the Virgin gave birth unto Thee, the life-bearing Cluster exuding the sweetness of universal salvation.

O Theotokos, the race of Adam, which hath been exalted by thee to a blessedness which surpasseth comprehension, doth glorify thee as is meet.

Canon I to the incorporeal hosts the acrostic whereof is: “O ye divinely wise, let us solemnize praise for the assembly of the incorporeal ones,” the composition of John the Monk, of Damascus

*Irmos:* O ye people, let us send up a hymn unto our wondrous God, Who freed Israel from bondage, singing and crying out a hymn of victory unto Thee Who alone art Master.

Ye faithful, let us all hymn the uncreated Trinity, Who doth govern all the immaterial ranks of the heavenly choirs, and let us cry aloud: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Almighty God!

O Creator of the angels, Thou didst set as a beginning to Thy creations the immaterial essence which surroundeth Thy most honored throne, that it might cry out to Thee: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Almighty God!

Rejoice, O Gabriel, initiate of the mystery of the incarnation of God, and Michael, foremost among the immaterial ranks, who unceasingly cry out: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Almighty God!

*Theotokion:* I tremble before the mystery of Thy condescension, O Christ; for, God in essence, Thou didst deign to be born of the Virgin as a man, that Thou mightest save the world from slavery to the enemy.

Canon II to the incorporeal hosts, likewise the composition of John of Damascus

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Come ye, and, joining chorus, let us praise the noetic choirs of the incorporeal ranks, for they are divine ministers who unceasingly pray for our salvation and rejoice over our repentance.

The chief captains of the angels, chosen before others, the valiant commanders, the incorporeal intelligences, today arise for the celebration of the feast of their radiant memory. With them men also rejoice, offering a hymn to the Trinity.

O ye people, with spiritual joy let us rejoice today with the angels, for Gabriel again announceth glad tidings: the union of the Churches and the destruction of all adverse heresies, in the commemoration of the supreme commanders.

*Theotokion:* O most pure one, through the Holy Spirit thou gavest birth unto the Word of the Father, Who transcendeth nature and made His abode within thee, being furthermore of two natures and wills, yet immutably one in hypostasis; and Whose countenance we venerate.

Katavasia: I will open my mouth...

Ode III

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Render us aid by thy supplications, O all-pure one, repelling the onslaught of grievous circumstances.

Thou wast the reformation of our first mother, Eve, having given birth unto Christ, the Author of the life of the world, O Theotokos.

Gird me about with power, O all-pure one, who truly gavest birth in the flesh unto God, the hypostatic Power of the Father.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Plant Thou the fear of Thee in the hearts of Thy servants, O Lord, and be Thou the confirmation of us who call upon Thee in truth.

With strength, O Immortal One, hast Thou appointed the mighty ones who fulfill Thine all-holy will, ever standing before Thee in the highest.

O Christ, accept Thou those who pray in our behalf, the commanders of the angels, initiates of the mystery of Thine incarnation and Thine honored resurrection.

Thou hast appointed angels as guardians for men, in that Thou art compassionate; and Thou hast shown forth the ministers of the salvation of Thy favored ones.

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God, thou hast ineffably conceived the Lord and Savior, Who delivereth from evil those who truly call upon thee.

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

O Michael, chief captain, foremost among the angels, as a secondary luminary of the Trinity hast thou revealed thyself to those who faithfully praise thee.

Having proclaimed the coming of God in the flesh, Gabriel faithfully filled the whole world with the effulgence of divine grace.

O ever-hymned couple, radiant and immaterial pair, show forth the light of God upon those who faithfully celebrate your memory.

*Theotokion:* O pure one, Isaiah hymned thine Offspring, Who transcendeth nature; and I sing, too, that I may obtain His cleansing.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “That which was commanded...”—

O ye captains of the heavenly ones, ye foremost among those who are loftily enthroned and awesome in divine glory, O Michael and Gabriel, supreme commanders, chief captains of the angels, and all ye bodiless ones, ministers of the Master. Praying unceasingly in behalf of the world, ask ye remission of the sins we have committed, and that we may find mercy and grace on the day of judgment. *Twice*

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

O pure and blessed one, who art full of divine grace: Out of the compassion of thy loving-kindness, with the hosts on high, the archangels and all the bodiless ones, do thou unceasingly entreat Him Who was born of thee, that, before the end, He mercifully grant us forgiveness of sins and correction of life, that we may find mercy.

Ode IV

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

O Theotokos, thou untilled field which gave rise to the life-creating Ear of grain, Him Who bestoweth life upon the world. Save those who hymn thee.

All we who are illumined proclaim thee to be the Theotokos, O all-pure one; for thou didst bear the Sun of righteousness, O Ever-virgin.

As Thou art sinless, grant cleansing for our ignorance, and give peace to Thy world, O God, through the prayers of her who bore Thee.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Thou didst mount Thy steeds, Thine apostles, O Lord, and didst take their bridles in Thy hands; and Thy chariot hath become salvation for those who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst mount the angels like steeds, O Thou Who lovest mankind, and didst take their reins in Thy hand, and Thy chariot became salvation unto those who unceasingly cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thy virtue covereth the angels, O Thou Who lovest mankind, and with Thy divine, glorious praise, O Thou Who art without beginning, doth fill the ends of the earth, which cry out with them: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou didst go forth unto the salvation of Thy people, O compassionate Christ, and Thou dost summon Thy friends, the powers; and Thy coming hath been gladness unto all who faithfully cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Virgin and Mother hast thou been supernaturally shown to be, O all-pure one; for thou gavest birth to Christ, both God and man, to Whom the ranks of the angels cry out with fear: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

In Jericho of old the great Michael, supreme commander of the hosts of the Lord and chief among the bodiless ones, appeared unto Joshua, son of Nun, who was waging war, and gave them victory, fighting for him; and the servant of God, receiving power from him, captured the enemy, vanquishing them with the spear.

Once the great Gabriel, the truly divine archangel, chief among the bodiless hosts, appeared, bearing the glad tidings of a child to Zechariah the priest. Wherefore, the voice of the Word, who was born John, restoreth the voice of prophecy to his own father.

All the ends of the earth rejoice today with joy, O God, celebrating the honored memory of Thine archangels, the divine Michael and Gabriel of godly wisdom. And together with them the whole rank of angels rejoiceth, for by their protection is the world preserved.

*Theotokion:* Thou alone didst remain pure after giving birth, and only thou hast been shown to be without husband, O thou who with milk didst nourish the true Word of the Father, Who through the Holy Spirit assumed our form, that of a servant, O Virgin Theotokos. And venerating the divine likeness of His countenance, we honor Him.

Ode V

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Calm thou the unbearable tempest of my passions, O thou who gavest birth to God, the Lord and Helmsman.

The ranks of angels and the assembly of men serve thine Offspring, O all-pure Theotokos.

O Mary, unwedded Theotokos, undo the hopes of the enemy and gladden those who hymn thee.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Going before me with the light of Thy knowledge, O Lord, out of the night of ignorance to the path of Thy commandments do Thou lead me, who ever stray toward the soul-destroying way.

Upborne to the heights by inexorable longing for Thee, O Christ, Thou utmost of all desires, the angelic powers unceasingly glorify Thee.

Noetic by nature and incorrupt through Thy grace hast Thou made Thine angels, those who hymn Thy majesty, O Christ, fashioning them according to Thine image, O Unapproachable One.

Through their nearness to Thee, O Christ, Thou hast kept Thy servants uninclined towards evil, for Thou art the Source of goodness, and Thou dost do good unto those who serve Thee as is meet.

*Theotokion:* Enliven my soul which hath been done to death by vile passions, O all-immaculate one, who gavest birth unto the Preserver of life, and direct it to the path of eternal and blessed life.

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

When, of old, Balaam the prophet did not submit to the ineffable and divine wonders of God, an angel appeared to his ass at the crossroads and dreadfully rebuked him, and in showing forth his animal as rational he altered nature.

When Peter had been arrested and languished in prison, an angel of God appeared, delivering him from the hands of Herod, from bonds and death. Wherefore, come ye, let us all honor the wise angels as divine protectors of our souls.

O angels and archangels, ye divine powers of God, by your supplications offered continually unto God put an end to the uproar of battles, heresies in the Church and all temptations, and do ye maintain us in peace.

*Theotokion:* We know Thee to be the God of creation: One in two natures, two actions and wills, though unconfused, the Son of God Who took flesh from a woman, whose image depicted on boards we venerate.

Ode VI

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

O Theotokos, we, the faithful, declare thee to be the temple and ark of God, the living tabernacle and gate of heaven.

The Destroyer of pagan temples, Who was thine Offspring, O Mary, Bride of God, is worshipped as God with the Father and the Spirit.

The Word of God hath shown thee to those who are on earth as the ladder of heaven, O Theotokos, for by thee did He come down to us.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the sea monster, O Lord. Save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

By Thy Word, O Lord, Thou didst in godly manner bring the heavenly beings, the immortal hosts, out of non-existence, making them luminous.

Honored initiates of the mysteries of the praise of God have ye been, O incorporeal ones, citizens of heaven, truly divine tabernacles, who serve the Creator as is meet.

Thee, O Son of God Who art wholly without beginning, do the noetic ranks of the bodiless ones unceasingly praise and glorify as the Creator and Author of all things.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure one, thou hast been vouchsafed to cradle in thine embrace Him Who eternally sitteth with the Father in the highest. Render Him merciful unto us, thy servants, O pure one.

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Taking flight in mind away from material corruption, let us with fear honor the immaterial ones who are bodiless like fire, flame and light, chanting hymns unto them with lips of clay.

Calm the tempests of the passions, O archangels, and do ye also quell all revolts against the Faith, for ye are the holy and fiery chief commanders of the Trinity.

O captains Michael and Gabriel, ye chief commanders and archangels of God, leaders of the bodiless ones, preserve us from all heresies by your protection.

*Theotokion:* O Christ, being incorporeal in that Thou art God, Thou didst manifest Thyself incarnate from the womb of her who knew not man; and, as man, Thou wast a bearer of the flesh. Thy likeness do we honor, O ye faithful.

Kontakion, in Tone II—

O ye chief commanders of God, ministers of glory divine, captains of the angels and instructors of men. Beg ye great mercy and that which is profitable for us, for ye are the supreme commanders of the bodiless hosts.

*Ikos:* In Thy Scriptures, O immortal One Who lovest mankind, Thou didst say that a multitude of angels rejoiceth in heaven over one man who repenteth. Wherefore, O Sinless One, Who alone knowest the hearts of men, amid our transgressions we ever make bold to beseech Thee to have compassion and send down compunction upon us, unworthy though we are, granting us forgiveness, O Master, in that Thou art compassionate, for the supreme commanders of the bodiless host entreat Thee in behalf of us all.

Ode VII

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Incarnate of the Virgin’s womb, Thou didst reveal Thyself for our salvation. Wherefore, knowing her to be Mother and Theotokos, we cry out in Orthodox manner: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

From the root of Jesse, O most blessed Virgin, didst thou put forth the Rod, the flourishing Fruit of salvation, unto those who with faith cry out to thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Through the Theotokos, O hypostatic Wisdom of the Most High, fill Thou with wisdom and power divine all who with faith sing to Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

O Compassionate One, Thou didst show forth as light the immaterial essence of Thine angels that are unceasingly filled with ineffable light, crying: Blessed art Thou, O God, forever!

The myriads of ministering angels cannot bear to behold the sight of the Countenance before which they unceasingly stand, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Thou didst create the nature of the angels by Thy hypostatic Word, and having sanctified it by the divine Spirit, O God, Thou didst teach it to bless the Trinity forever.

*Triadicon:* Mindful of the three Hypostases, we glorify the uncircumscribed essence of the Father, the Son and the Spirit, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* The children that went down from Judæa in Babylon once trod down the flame of the furnace by their faith in the Trinity, singing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Come, O human race, and with the choirs of the bodiless ones let us worship, celebrating on this propitious day the memory of the wise archangels of Christ, singing: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Of old, Abraham the God-seer and the glorious Lot gave shelter to the angels, in that they were hospitable; and they found fellowship with the angels, crying: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O God of our fathers!

To the valiant Manoah and the most wise Tobit appeared the angels who give rewards for the struggles of life as is meet; and once the Angel of the children quenched the flame in the fiery furnace.

*Theotokion:* All that is ours by nature didst Thou take from the Virgin, save only change, O Jesus, and with the fathers we proclaim Thee to be of two natures, but One in hypostasis; and, depicting the visage thereof, we faithfully venerate it.

Ode VIII

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Quench thou the burning and flaming darts of the adversary which are launched at us, that we may hymn thee forever.

Thou gavest birth to God the Word, our Creator and Savior, in manner transcending nature; wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee forever.

The unapproachable Light Who dwelt within thee hath shown thee forth forever, O Virgin, as a golden-rayed lamp of enlightenment.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* The Lord Who was glorified on the holy mountain, and by the fire in the bush revealed to Moses the mystery of the Ever-virgin, hymn ye and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Let us emulate the life of the angels and soar aloft in mind to the heights, and with them let us immaterially chant unto the Lord, hymning and supremely exalting Him for all ages!

The angels, heavenly members of the chorus which surroundeth the throne of glory and ever dance about God, hymn and supremely exalt Him for all ages!

*Triadicon:* The Trinity, which unceasingly maketh its ministers a flame of immaterial fire in the highest and showeth forth its angels as spirits, let us worship and glorify for all ages.

*Theotokion:* Him before Whom myriads of angels and archangels stand in trepidation wast thou vouchsafed to bear in thine arms, O Theotokos. Pray thou that those who glorify Him for all ages may be saved.

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Michael the archangel is chief among the angels; but with him is radiantly glorified Gabriel, the initiate of the mystery of grace, the honored one who obtained the consent of the Virgin, the champion leader of the incorporeal ones; and they both proclaim joy unto those who cry: O ye people, exalt Christ supremely for all ages!

Ezekiel, beholding the ranks of angels in their divers forms, proclaimed, prophesying: Among them six-winged seraphim stood in intercession, and many-eyed cherubim surrounded them; and with them I saw most radiant archangels glorifying Christ for all ages.

How the dread coming of Thy second judgment will be did Daniel foretell in revelation: The thrones were set, and the Ancient One sat, and He let in the myriads of angels who stand with fear and cry out with incessant voices to the Trinity for all ages.

*Theotokion:* The Word, Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit, of His own will manifested Himself from the Virgin as like unto us, not mingling one with the other the two natures of His awesome union. For He showed Himself to be One and the Same in both, in two natures and one hypostasis. And now we bow down before the image of His likeness.

Ode IX

Canon to the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Full of joy and gladness is thy memory which poureth forth healings upon those who draw nigh and piously proclaim thee to be the Theotokos.

We chant psalms to thee, O gracious one, and unceasingly offer thee the hymn: Rejoice!, for thou hast poured forth joy upon all.

Thou didst put forth a comely Fruit which, unto those who partake thereof, imparteth not corruption, O Theotokos, but life for those who magnify thee.

Canon I to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Thou didst transcend the laws of nature, conceiving the Creator and Lord, and didst become a portal of salvation for the world. Wherefore, we magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

O Christ, Who hast ineffably united those who are in heaven with those who are on earth, and hast made one Church of angels and men, Thee do we unceasingly magnify.

O ye angels and archangels, thrones, virtues and dominions, principalities and powers, cherubim and seraphim. Pray ye with the Theotokos in behalf of the world.

O Michael and Gabriel, who are shown to be leaders of all, visit those who with love honor your most festive memory and faithfully cry out: Save us from all evil circumstances!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O holy bride of God! Rejoice, thou who for the faithful gavest birth unto the Light of the world! Rejoice, rampart and shelter of us all! Unceasingly entreat God in our behalf, for He is our Benefactor.

Canon II to the Bodiless Hosts

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Ye have shown yourselves to be champions for the infirm, for those who sail the sea and those who are in need, O Michael and Gabriel, first among the bodiless hosts.

O Gabriel, in that thou dost hold chorus with the divine powers and thrones, and art the champion leader of the angels and an initiate of the mysteries of God, pray thou to the Savior in our behalf.

In that ye are the protectors of the world and commanders of the hosts on high, entreat ye the Savior in our behalf.

*Theotokion:* Together we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou savest us from the passions and fulfillest those of our supplications which are to our good.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

O Michael, chief captain, from the Father of lights thou didst receive command of the fiery servants. Wherefore, thou dost have the radiant brilliance of His glory, standing before His most honored throne as first among the immaterial ranks.

Glory...: Spec. Mel: “With the disciples...”—

O most glorious Michael, divine supreme commander, who standest before God, leader of the immaterial powers, archangels and angels, dominions, thrones and principalities. Standing before the unbearable throne, protect, keep, preserve and save all who with faith honor thee as the intercessor for the world.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Thou art more honorable than the glorious cherubim, O all-hymned one, and more glorious beyond compare than the awesome seraphim, and more holy than all the holy angels, O all-pure one; for thou didst ineffably give birth in the flesh to the Creator of all, O Theotokos. Him do thou entreat, that He grant remission of transgressions unto thy servants.

At the Praises, 4 stichera, 3 in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

O Michael, chief commander, with fear we hymn thee as first captain of the heavenly ranks, mighty intercessor, protector and deliverer of men on earth; and we pray that thou deliver us from every deadly pestilence.

As chief captain of the divine hosts of heaven thou dost today summon the choirs of men to hold one radiant festival with the angels, that of their divine synaxis, and with them to chant the thrice-holy hymn unto God.

O Michael, divine intellect, keep and protect all throughout life us who with faith flee beneath the shelter of thy divine pinions; and at the dreaded hour of our death, O archangel, stand forth as a most gracious helper for us all.

And another in Tone IV, the composition of Ephraim of Karyes—

O supreme commanders, three-Sunned rays made luminous by light divine, ye enlighten the immaterial legions; shown forth as light with splendid brightness in the highest, ye shine forth the fire of the unapproachable Godhead in the world. Wherefore, with lips of flame ye unceasingly chant the thrice-holy hymn: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O our God! Glory be to Thee!

Glory..., in Tone V—

Where thy grace doth overshadow, O archangel, the power of the devil is driven off, for the fallen Lucifer cannot bear to behold thy light. Wherefore, we beseech thee: By thy mediation quench thou his fiery darts which are hurled at us, delivering us from his temptations, O right praiseworthy supreme commander Michael.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and as is fitting we, the faithful, glorify thee, the impregnable city, unassailable rampart, steadfast intercessor and refuge for our souls.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the first canon to the angels, and 4 from Ode VI of the second canon to the angels.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

*Stichos:* Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified exceedingly.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews \(2:2-10\)

Brethren: If the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by those who heard Him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to His own will? For unto the angels hath He not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying: “What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that Thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; Thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of Thy hands: Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet.” For in that He put all in subjection under him, He left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, Who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that He by the grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became Him, for Whom are all things, and by Whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His hosts.

*Stichos:* For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were created.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. Luke \(10:16-21\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “He who heareth you heareth Me; and he who despiseth you despiseth Me; and he who despiseth Me despiseth Him Who sent Me.” And the seventy returned again with joy, saying: “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name.” And He said unto them: “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.” In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said: “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.”

Communion Verse—

He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.

