The 11th Day of the Month of November

Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs

Minas, Victor & Vincent,

of the Holy Martyr Stephanida,

& of Our Venerable Father Theodore the Studite, the Confessor

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the martyrs, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Lacerated by iron claws, beaten with a scourge of cords, thy body burned with fire, thou didst not deny the saving name of Christ, nor wast thou vanquished in mind, nor didst thou sacrifice to graven images, but wast a willing wholeburnt offering, a pure and perfect sacrifice to thy Master, O martyr Minas.

Thine eyes put out, suspended upon a tree, burned all over by torches, scourged with thongs by the cruelty of the judge, thy head cut off by the sword, thou didst rejoice, O glorious Victor, passionbearer of the Savior, vanquishing legions of the enemy by the activity of the Holy Spirit.

The Lord hath crowned thee with a diadem of grace, O much suffering Stephanida, for willingly didst thou give thyself over to torments with spiritual valor. Bound between two palm trees, thou wast torn asunder, and didst like a sparrow take flight to God, leaving thy flesh in the hands of thy tormenters, O right glorious martyr.

And 3 stichera for the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O father Theodore, true to thy name thou hast given to those who piously love thee the gifts thou didst receive, which pass understanding. And having increased thy talant, O blessed one, thou didst hear the voice of God calling thee to His bridal-chamber, where thou now livest by the throne of the King of all, O right wondrous one.

O Theodore, father of fathers, thou didst bring to Christ multitudes of monastics and wast the godly cause of their salvation, illumined with doctrines, and shown, prophetically, to be the mouth of the Lord, O most wise one. Standing now before Him, be thou mindful of us.

The abundant grace of the Spirit was poured forth in thy mouth, O wise initiate of sacred mysteries, and caused a wellspring of doctrines to gush forth, revealing thee, O Theodore, to be a champion of piety, a zealous conveyor of the truth, a pillar and fortress of the Orthodox Faith, and a most excellent rule of the monastic life, O most wise one.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Again hath dawned for us the yearly commemoration of the beacons of the world: Minas, Victor, and Vincent, who enlighten the hearts of the faithful by their struggles for Christ and His Cross. Wherefore, in hymns let us honor Christ our God, Who hath crowned them with glory and honor.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

The pure Virgin, Thy Mother, beholding the iniquitous men who nailed Thee unjustly to the Tree, was wounded, O Savior, in the womb, as Simeon foretold.

At the Aposticha: This sticheron of the martyrs, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Come, ye who love the martyrs, let us honor the thrice-radiant chorus of martyrs: Minas, Victor, and Vincent, for they paid out their blood and purchased life eternal. Wherefore, they spoke out against the author of evil: “We shall not prefer corruptible things to incorruptible; we shall not do battle for an earthly and mortal king; but we shall fight for the living King Who ever crieth to the faithful: He that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.”

Glory, of the venerable one, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, the proclamation of thy corrections hath gone forth unto all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens. Thou hast destroyed hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before the Lord, ask thou peace for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave thee birth cried out: “What is this strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended upon the Tree in the flesh, O Bestower of Life?”

Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

Glory…, of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

Instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, beacon for the whole world, divinely inspired adornment of monastics: by thy teachings thou hast illumined all, O Theodore. O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and 2 canons for the saints, with 4 troparia each.

Ode I

Canon of the martyrs, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

O ye sacred people, now passing gloriously not over the Red Abyss but the sea of the struggles of Minas the sufferer, with glorious Moses and Miriam, the wise woman and prophetess, let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

O Minas, champion of piety, thou wast well pleased to stand as a warrior of Christ before the savage destroyer and the wicked tormentor who breathed forth the anger of threats and the heat of wrath. And thou wast His beacon, crying aloud: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Thou, O Christ, didst foretell: When I be lifted up, I will draw those born of earth; and Thou didst do this indeed, summoning from the ends of the world the ranks of martyrs and the people who cry out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

*Theotokion:* The rod of Aaron which budded prefigured thee, O Virgin, the root which sprang forth from Jesse, which shone forth to the world God incarnate, the imperishable bloom. Him do thou ever entreat on behalf of us who have recourse to thee, O Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable Theodore, the acrostic whereof is: “In hymns I honor the glorious Theodore”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Illumined with the radiant effulgence of the Holy Spirit, Thou wast a pillar of light, O divinely eloquent father, guiding those who with godly mind hasten to the promised land, O Theodore, initiate of ineffable mysteries.

Departing most joyfully unto God with never-flagging resolve, O venerable one, thou didst show thyself before thine end to be arrayed in life-bearing mortality and hast now, as is meet, received life which ageth not, O God-bearing father Theodore.

Vanquishing the uprisings of the passions and the efforts of the torments like a youth, O blessed one, thou didst set them all at nought, showing courage and teaching that it is right to venerate the image of Christ and the depictions of the saints, O thou who art pleasing to God.

Studying the divinely inspired Scriptures with a purified mind, O most wise and venerable one, thou didst lay up a wealth of virtues and the dogmas of piety, and wast enriched by divine vision and the splendor of thy life, having been illumined by both.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the incarnate Word of God, Who before was incorporeal, yet lived supernaturally in the world as the God-man, O most immaculate Virgin Theotokos. Wherefore, we all honor thee, our intercessor after God.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

The tormentor, stung by thy most wise words, wounded thee without mercy with rawhide thongs, thinking thereby to break thee, O invincible martyr.

Directing the eyes of thy mind to the Lord, thou didst endure unbearable oppression with a most courageous spirit, O right glorious one.

Fearing not the exceeding painful torment, but breathing with divine zeal, thou didst depart for the contest, crying: “Unlooked for and uninvited, I have come!”

*Theotokion:* He that was incarnate of Thee and Who accepted voluntary death hath led up from the gates of hell me who have been slain by the evil tasting of the tree.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Fortified by the armor of Christ, O most blessed one, grievously wounded and imprisoned in a dungeon, thou didst endure the pangs of stripes as one who hath a share in the sufferings and kingdom.

Manifestly protected by God, and aflame with zeal for Him, with thy doctrines thou didst destroy the vile teachings of the iniquitous, for thou wast enriched by grace from God, as is meet, O father.

Active in vision, O divinely eloquent one, in thine activity thou wast a theologian for us, a learned ascetic, a glorious hieromartyr, a pillar of Orthodoxy, the confirmation of the Church.

*Theotokion:* God the Word, Who with the Father and the Spirit is eternal, desiring to restore the father of our race, took his nature from thee hypostatically, O pure Mother of God, and found thee to be more holy than all.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Thine angelic life of fasting thou didst adorn with the struggles of suffering, O divinely blessed Theodore, and thou hast been shown to abide with the angels. With them cease thou never to pray to Christ God for us all.

*Ikos:* Let us now praise Theodore, the radiant beauty of ascetics, the confirmation of the Church of Christ; for he appeared as a new pillar of fire, burning the heads of the heretical but illumining the souls of those who believe in the Orthodox Faith, leading them to Jerusalem on high, the city of God, as another Israel. And let us cry out to him together: O most blessed father, forget us not, praying unceasingly to Christ for us all!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom…”—

Egypt, which before had been held fast by the cruel darkness of ignorance, shone thee forth, O divinely wise martyr Minas, as a beacon to all the world, who by the rays of thy divine struggles dost mightily disperse the night of ungodliness. Wherefore, splendidly celebrating thy radiant and honored day, we earnestly cry out to thee: O adornment of sufferers, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Enriched with divine dogmas, thou didst hold fast to the Orthodox Faith, braving danger for it, O Theodore, suffering scourging and incarceration, and enduring affliction in prison. O venerable father, entreat God, that He grant us great mercy.

Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, who excelled the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thine entreaties cleanse me who have, more than all others, become dust, defiled by carnal transgressions, and grant me great mercy, O pure one.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended aloft, cried out, maternally lamenting: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest of Thine own will, desiring to deliver man from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

By the shedding of thy blood the burning ember of polytheism was quenched, and the legion of demons was drowned, and the Church of Christ, which praises thee, was watered thereby, O most blessed passionbearer Minas.

O martyr, by being lifted up on the tree thou didst portray the suffering on the Cross of Him Who slew the cruel serpent; and thou didst endure lacerations which win for thee that delight which is in the heavens, O most valorous one.

Thou didst undergo a trial of pain past nature, O athlete, but divine love, strengthening thy nature, caused thee to receive forgetfulness, urging thee to submit to wounds, rejoicing.

*Theotokion:* Ineffably didst thou give birth unto God incarnate, Who fashioned for Himself a home of thy blood, and in godly manner is known in two essences and wills, O thou who knewest not wedlock.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

O blessed Theodore, namesake of the gifts of God, thou hast been given to the world, resplendent with rich gifts, as one truly possessed of a wellspring of radiance. Wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed to join chorus with the multitude of fasters and witnesses.

O thy firm and mighty opposition, whereby thou didst trample the savagery of the tyrants underfoot! For this thou hast manifestly attained utter beatitude, in manner past understanding, O divinely wise one, and chantest with the incorporeal ones: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

The Word of God, most manifestly dwelling within thee, doth abundantly pour forth rivers of dogmas, O all-wise Theodore; and thy disciples, delighting now therein, O divinely inspired one, thankfully cry out with never-ceasing voices: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

*Theotokion:* United wholly with thee, O most pure one, He Who did not leave the bosom of the Father wholly reneweth man in thee, and was pleased to make His abode within thy womb, abasing Himself voluntarily in the richness of His compassion and enriching the world with divinity.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Luminous with the bright rays of thy witness, having overshadowed dark godlessness, O most wise one, thou hast enlightened the fullness of the faithful who hymn thee, O all-laudable one.

Every contrivance of the foe hath vanished away through thy mighty endurance, for neither hunger, nor wounds, nor immolation, nor subjection to iron hooks clouded thy resolve.

Surrounded by faith as the sun is by its rays, thou didst make thine abode in the desert and didst enlighten all the cities, preaching Christ, the Son of God, Who came in the flesh, O glorious one.

*Theotokion:* The Deliverer, born of thee in manner transcending nature, maketh me new who am subject to corruption, freeing me from the ancient curse, O pure Mother of God. Him do thou entreat, that He save me.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Having cleansed mind, soul and body by thy word, thou didst become a most honorable temple of the God of all, living and animate, offering thy whole self as a sacrifice of sweet savor unto Christ, O father, being both priest and sacrifice.

Illumined with the radiance of the Spirit, O blessed father, upon all thou didst shine forth with thy divinely eloquent tongue the all-pure light of the Trinity and the ineffable incarnation of God the Word, a mystery which passeth understanding.

Dwelling now noetically with the angels, entreat Christ, that He deliver from sufferings and misfortunes those who bless and honor the most precious and blessed memory of thy sufferings, O God-bearing Theodore.

*Theotokion:* The Son of God, Who made His abode within thee in ineffable manner, becometh man; He Who shone forth from the Father before time began hath delivered man from corruption and led him up to light and incorruption, in that He alone is compassionate.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Burned by fire, thy wounds rubbed raw with haircloth, thou didst yet remain without pain, for divine grace, being present, strengthened thee, O Minas.

Thou dost stand condemned before the tribunal of the tyrants, denouncing their falsehood, O ever memorable one, and giving thyself to the faithful as a pillar of piety.

With the sweat of thy struggles thou didst dry up the falsehood of idolatry, and didst fashion of thyself a temple of the worshipful Trinity, O right wondrous passion-bearer Minas.

*Theotokion:* Heal thou the incurable passions of my soul with the balm of thy goodness, O all-immaculate one, who gavest birth to Christ, the good Savior, for those who are in the world.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou didst finish thy life in chastity, O thou of sacred eloquence, and, adorned with righteousness, courage and wisdom, thou didst mount the most beautiful chariot of the virtues, O most blessed and venerable one.

Thy divine discourses on the dogmas emit a magnificent fragrance, O most wise one, and bring all from the abyss of evil heresies up to the highest summit of Orthodoxy.

Light and its divine yoke-fellow, radiant gladness, have now manifestly shone forth in thee, O father; for thou didst flourish like a palm-tree and didst grow like a cedar, O right wondrous Theodore.

*Theotokion:* Through thy supplications may we be delivered from grievous transgressions, O pure one, and may we obtain the divine effulgence of the Son of God Who was ineffably incarnate of thee, O all-pure one.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

O Passionbearer Minas, Christ our God, the imperishable Crown of martyrs, took thee from a transient army, and showed thee forth as a partaker of what is incorruptible and heavenly.

*Ikos:* The memory of the martyrs is a cause of great gladness for us, for it showeth forth courage amid suffering and victory over the enemy in the radiant and joyful confession of grace. Come ye, therefore, all ye who love this festival, and let us be glad therein, keeping the memory of the passion-bearer Minas as the best and abiding time of our gladness, and receiving the gift of being loosed from our passions, for Christ God is the Bestower thereof, the imperishable Crown of martyrs.

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

With wounds didst thou strip off sin’s garment of skin, and thou didst robe thyself in vesture which groweth not old and which grace, appearing, wore, O blessed one.

By the burning zeal of thine honorable and mighty struggles hath wicked and thorny ungodliness been utterly consumed, O martyr, and the leaping flame of ignorance is extinguished by the streams of thy blood, O most blessed one.

Possessed of abundant gifts, thou dost pour forth miracles upon those who thine honored festival, O right wondrous Minas; and thou dost aid those who sing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, Whom the hosts of Heaven and the assemblies of those born of earth do bless: He Who hath delivered us from the ancient curse, O blessed one.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

He Who seeth all things, perceiving the purity of thy mind, appointed thee shepherd of His reason-endowed sheep, O most blessed father Theodore, and to Him thou now criest out in gladness: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Venerating the divine likeness of the image of Christ’s manhood, O thrice-blessed Theodore, thou didst sustain thine opposition to the enemies of God even unto the shedding of thy blood, chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thy discourse, O father most rich, was shown to be seasoned with salt, and thy life was illumined with the effulgence of the Spirit. And shining now therewith, thou criest out, rejoicing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Behold, the divine prophecy of the godly David hath now been fulfilled! Those rich in grace now truly entreat thy countenance, O pure Theotokos, blessing the God of our fathers.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

O Minas, thou wast revealed as a crownbearer; having set at nought the enemies of the Cross of thy Lord, thou didst put them to shame and didst cry out, O most blessed one: All ye works of the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him unto the ages!

God hath wrought wonders in thy memory, pouring forth healings, both spiritual and bodily, through thy relics upon us who cry out: All ye works of the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him unto the ages!

Thou didst offer God thy service; and having bowed thy head to the ground, thou wast beheaded by the sword, O martyr, crying aloud: All ye works of the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him unto the ages!

Today is the Holy Church adorned with your blood, as with purple and fine linen, O Minas, Victor and Vincent, who cry out: All ye works of the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him unto the ages!

*Theotokion:* Virgin remaineth the womb of her who bore the Savior Who without seed was conceived of the Holy Spirit, God uncircumscribable wrapped in flesh, the Word Who with the Father is equally without beginning. Him do all works praise and supremely exalt as Lord unto the ages!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst show the adherents of vile heresies to be anathema, O God-bearing Theodore, teaching all to honor the all-pure image of Christ, to venerate it with honor and godly wisdom, and to chant unto the Master: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely forever!

Throughout thy life, O divinely eloquent Theodore, thou wast a guide to Orthodoxy, a most radiant beacon, an instructor of divine visage, a model for monks, and a renowned recorder of laws, teaching all to chant: Ye priests, bless Christ the Master and exalt Him supremely forever!

Thou didst struggle on the earth as a defender of piety and a true denouncer of injustice, O most blessed one; and, as a gift of God, thou wast crowned in the heavens with a crown of righteousness, for thou didst finish the race and keep the Faith, exalting Christ supremely forever.

Thou didst adorn thy mind with understanding, thy desire with chastity, and didst restrain thine anger with the girdle of courage, O most wise Theodore, setting the powers of thy soul aright with righteousness in sacred manner, and chanting melodiously: Ye children, bless! Ye priests, hymn! Ye people, exalt him supremely forever!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyrs

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Thou didst love no less than thou wast beloved, O passion-bearer, laying down thy beloved life for Christ Who loved thee and Who glorified thy witness with Himself, O ever-memorable one.

As a lampstand aflame with the light of the threefold Sun did the three inseparable martyrs appear: Minas, Victor, and Vincent, illumining the faithful and dispersing the gloom of the demons.

Accept, as that which is thy due, our praise of thee which proceedeth from a readiness which, I know, surpasseth our words; and from thy treasuries bestow upon us gifts without number.

*Theotokion:* Of old did all the prophets rightly praise thee, the Mother of the King and Master; and now, the apostles and martyrs magnify thee, glorifying thee with us.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Illumined with the streams of thy tears, as a faster, and by the outpourings of thy blood, as a witness of Christ, thou art resplendent in both, O venerable one; and, arrayed in righteousness as a priest, thou dwellest now with the choirs of God, enlightened now in inaccessible heights, O thrice-blessed one.

Having passed through thy life in pure manner, thou dwellest now in the holiest of holy places, receiving a crown of magnificence and royal vesture, sumptuous and sacred; and resplendent now therein, thou standest before the Bridegroom, delighting in deification.

Thou wast vouchsafed to behold the Wellspring of good things, O God-bearing Theodore, for, having truly passed through thy most divine life and freed thy mind from its earthly state by purity of life, thou didst become a witness and athlete, O sacred one.

The proclamation of thy words was a gift of God audible to us like thunder, O most lauded one, and the writings of thy doctrines flow like rivers to the ends of the world. Wherefore, as is meet, we call thee theologian and herald of God.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be the Mother of God, O Virgin, having given birth bodily to the good Word, Whom the Father put forth from His own heart before time began, in that He is good, and Whom we now acknowledge as transcending all bodies, even though he arrayed Himself in a body.

Exapostilarion from the Octoechos, and that of the martyrs: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars…”—

The stars adorn the heavens, O Jesus; and Minas, Victor, Vincent and Stephanida adorn the Church. For their sake grant Orthodox Christians victory over their adversaries.

Glory…: Exapostilarion of the venerable one—

In thy piety thou wast shown to be an animate tower of the dogmas of Orthodoxy, denouncing the deception of the iconoclasts. Wherefore, having ended thy confession with suffering, thou hast been glorified.

Now & ever…—

All of us, the faithful, now send thee as mediatress to Him Who was born of thee, and also the many that were crucified for Him. Wherefore, cease not, O Virgin, to intercede for us.

At the Aposticha, this sticheron to the martyrs, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them.

Come, ye faithful, let us honor Minas, the glorious passion-bearer of Christ, mighty in battle, who struggled well in piety, and set at nought the dominion of emperors and tyrants. Wherefore, as he hath boldness before Christ God, he prayeth unceasingly that our souls be saved.

Glory…, of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Theodore our father, for we have known thee truly to tread thy path aright. Blessed art thou who, serving Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, if at Thy tribunal…”—

O Lord, when the sun saw Thee, the Sun of righteousness, suspended upon the Tree, it hid its rays, and the moon turned its light into darkness; and Thy most immaculate Mother was wounded in her womb.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

For the martyrs:

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \[6: 10-17\]

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

For the venerable one:

Epistle to the Hebrews, §335 \[13: 17-21\]

Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

For the martyrs:

Gospel according to Matthew, §38 \[10: 32-33, 37-38, 19: 27-30\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. He who loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he who loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he who taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.” Then answered Peter and said unto Him: “Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee; what shall we have therefore?” And Jesus said unto them: “Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed Me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one who hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for My name’s sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.”

For the venerable one:

Gospel according the Matthew, §10 \[4:25-5:12\]

At that time there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: And He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you.”

Communion Verse—

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.

