The 12th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of Our Father Among The Saints John, Patriarch Of Alexandria, The Almsgiver

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Nilus

At Vespers

At "Lord, I have cried…", six stichera: three for the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: Spec .Mel.: "Thou hast given a sign…"—

Scattering, thou didst distribute thy bread to them that were in need thereof, O wondrous John, emulating in mercy the most merciful Master, O venerable one. Wherefore, thy memory truly abideth forever, O holy one. By thy supplications do thou save them that celebrate it with faith from temptations and tribulations, O hierarch most rich.

Foreseeing thy purity, the rightness of thy mind and thy godly demeanor, He Who seeth things that are hidden elevated thee to a most magnificent throne, anointing and perfecting thee with chrism, O wise one, and manifestly appointing thee the pilot of His flock which thou didst guide to the heaven of divine desire, O divinely eloquent John.

All the requests of thy heart, O right wondrous one, the Lord did grant; for thou didst observe all the laws of salvation. For God and neighbor didst thou unendingly love, O divinely blessed one, as thy very self; and thou didst satisfy them that were in need. Wherefore, we honor thee today, O John.

And three stichera for the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: "What shall we call you…"—

What now shall we call thee, O holy one? A river issuing forth from the noetic Eden, a torrent of gifts bestowed by God, a flood of the grace of teachings, a cup of wisdom and knowledge, a most mighty intercessor, a most active teacher. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

What shall we name thee, O venerable one? Cultivator of the gardens of immortality, O blessed one, husbandman of the noetic paradise of the faithful, one most skilled in the laws given by God, one who knowest the divinely inspired dogmas, speaker of nature most good, and instructor most content. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

What now shall I call thee, O wondrous one? One who laid down the rules of marriage, governor of chastity, instructor of monastics, guide of virginity, one who rightly balanced both, as having by experience passed through both. Many were thy goodly deeds and great thy fasting for God. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone II, the composition of Anatolius—

John, the emulator of Christ, the great pastor and beacon of the Alexandrians, the wellspring of mercy, increaseth his right sympathetic compassions for them that are in need. Come ye, let us who are poor in spirit drink our fill, emulating his serenity; for having with right compassionate demeanor shown hospitality to the wandering Christ through the poor, like Abraham of old he was counted worthy of blessedness, and he prayeth with boldness that our souls find mercy.

Now and ever…" Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: "When from the Tree…"—

She that kneweth not wedlock, beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross, O Jesus, said, weeping: "O my sweet Child, wherefore hast Thou left me alone who gave birth to Thee, O unapproachable Light of the all-unoriginate Father? Haste Thou, and glorify Thyself, that they that glorify Thy divine sufferings may receive divine glory!"

At the Aposticha, Glory…, of the venerable one, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee, the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Nilus our father; for by thy steps have we truly known how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O conversor with angels, who sharest the lot of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now and ever…" Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: "Thy martyrs…"—

The Virgin, Thy Mother, O Jesus Master, seeing Thee nailed to the Cross and accepting suffering of Thine own will, cried out: "Woe is me, O my sweet Child! How is it that Thou endurest wounds unjustly inflicted, O Physician Who hast healed the infirmity of man and hast by Thy lovingkindness delivered all from corruption?"

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

In patience thou didst acquire thy reward, O venerable father, who endured in prayers unceasingly, loved the poor and saw to their needs. Entreat Christ God, O blessed almsgiver John, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in the same tone—

With streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst make it to bear fruit an hundredfold. Thou wast a beacon to the whole world, radiating miracles. O Nilus our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved!

Now and ever…: Theotokion.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints

Ode I

Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* That which had been hewn down cut through the undivided, and the sun saw land which it had not seen before; the water engulfed the cruel enemy, and Israel traversed the impassable, and chanted the hymn: Let us sing to the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified!

Enlightened with sympathy of mind and illumined with the love of Christ, O father, shining with rays of almsgiving, thou becamest a most pure habitation of the one merciful God. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.

Looking ever to those things which abide forever, O most sacred father, with wise intent thou didst most splendidly exchange corruptible things for those that are incorruptible; and now thou dwellest in the heavens, crying out with the incorporeal choirs: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!

With thy godly intervention thou didst take pity on many, O venerable one, having endowed thy merciful thought therewith; and thou becamest a bestower of alms, for the consolation of men's souls and thought for the poor, O most wise, divinely blessed and most sacred John.

*Theotokion:* O blessed, pure and most hymned one, who alone gavest birth to the incarnate God, the ever-flowing Wellspring, pouring forth healings upon us, the faithful, who hope in thee: Beseech Him Whom thou didst bear, that He grant the world great mercy.

Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: "Nilus watereth me with noetic abundance," the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Richly irrigating my budding thought with thy mystic waters, O blessed one, grant that by thy supplications it may bring forth hymns to thee like grain.

The streams of thy words, manifestly issuing forth as from Eden, O Nilus most rich, irrigate all the ever-flowing face of the Church.

The river of thy dogmas and words, O divinely eloquent one, flooding, doth water the hearts of the pious and drowneth the assemblies of the impious.

*Theotokion:* The destroyer and enemy vomited forth soul-destroying venom into the ears of Eve; but thou, O Mother of God, having given birth unto Christ, hast healed the harm he wrought.

Ode III

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, Confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

The right sympathetic grace of the Merciful One appeared to thee, O right wondrous one, as a maiden of divine comeliness, wearing a wreath of olive sprigs and leading thee to divine mercy.

Thou hast been seated on a sacred throne as a godly judge, O glorious father John, in that thou didst live like an angel, offering up sacred sacrifices of peace to the Most Compassionate One.

Emulating the great lovingkindness of our merciful Lord Who beggared Himself in the flesh in His lovingkindness, O father, thou didst tend to the poor, gathering together the wanderers and homeless, thus fulfilling the commands of God.

*Theotokion:* Having made thine abode bodily within the Virgin, O Lord, Thou didst reveal Thyself to men as it was fitting that they see Thee; and Thou didst show her to be the true Theotokos, the help of the faithful, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of them that flee to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of them that are in darkness, and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thy thought beareth the gifts of the Spirit, O father, driving away thoughts of wickedness.

O oil most fragrant, sacred minister, thou hast breathed upon us thy prayers, in that thou didst live by active vision.

Heavenly teachings hast thou poured forth as from a wellspring, O most wise one, and thou hast enriched the pupils of the Church.

*Theotokion:* Mortify the wisdom of our flesh, O all-pure one, pouring forth a wellspring of immortality upon men.

Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: "To thee, the champion leader…"—

In thy vigilant prayer thou didst cut down the underbrush of the uprising of the passions of the body as with a scythe. As thou hast boldness before the Lord, free me from every misfortune, that I may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O universal father!

*Ikos:* Who among mortals can recount the suffering of thy manner of life, the countless labors of thy life, the many efforts which thou madest on earth like one of the incorporeal ones? Yet I cry out: Rejoice, river of divine graces; rejoice, pipe of the teachings of Christ! Rejoice, cup of wisdom and knowledge; rejoice, cultivation of the plantations of immortality! Rejoice, most active dogma of divinely inspired words; rejoice, most skilled interpreter of the God-given law! Rejoice, husbandman of the noetic garden of paradise; rejoice, great treasury of virginity! Rejoice, beautiful harp of the Spirit; rejoice, sword which cuttest at the root of the passions! Rejoice, summit of righteous men; rejoice, intercessor for the faithful born of earth! Rejoice, O universal father!

Sedalen of the hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: "Of the Wisdom…"—

Possessed of a merciful demeanor, thou didst show thyself to be good of heart and generous to the poor and needy, O divinely inspired John. Wherefore, with a title befitting thine activity, O blessed one, more than all other saints Christ the Bestower of good things enriched thee exceedingly. To Him, O divinely wise hierarch most rich, do thou pray, that He grant remission of sins unto them that celebrate thy holy memory with love.

Glory…, Sedalen of the venerable one, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: "That which was mystically commanded…"—

Having adorned thy mind with heavenly visions, thou didst pour forth rivers of theology, O God-bearing Nilus, watering the hearts of them that with faith draw forth the clear and pure drink of thy teachings and honor thy radiant and precious memory, O adornment of the venerable and boast of the fathers.

Theotokion—

O good one, by thy maternal supplications do thou, who gavest birth unto the immutable God, ever make steadfast my heart which is made inconstant by sin, loathfulness and the assaults of the deceiver, that with thanksgiving I may glorify thee. O all-immaculate Mary Theotokos, have mercy on the flock which thou hast acquired!

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Him Who was incarnate of thy pure blood and was born of thee in manner past comprehension, hanging on the Tree between malefactors, O pure one, thy womb convulsed with pain, and weeping maternally, thou didst cry out: "Woe is me! What is thy Thy divine and ineffable dispensation whereby Thou hast given life to Thy creation? I hymn Thy compassion!"

Ode IV

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have considered Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Thou wast shown to be a pure habitation of the Holy Trinity, O venerable one, the treasury of the temple of God and the firstfruits of hierarchs.

The kind-hearted Lord, remarking thy great mercy, sanctified thy soul, O most sacred father John.

A steadfast performer of the commandments of the Most Compassionate One wast thou, and thou hast been filled with His good things, dwelling in holy habitations.

*Theotokion:* As Thou art sinless, O God, grant us cleansing from our ignorant deeds, and bring peace to Thy world, through the prayers of her that gaveth Thee birth.

Canon of the Venerable One

Irmos: \(same as that of the preceding canon\)

Raise me up from the captivity of the passions, O most wise one, offering thy supplications to God as the price of my deliverance.

Having tested thyself with fasting, O most blessed one, thou didst cleanse thyself to arrange the dogmas of the wisdom of Christ in sacred manner.

Every elevation carried away by demonically inspired thoughts didst thou put down, O father, destroying the memory thereof with the multitude of thy wisdom.

*Theotokion:* The Word Who is equally everlasting with the Father, and Who as God was first incorporeal, becameth incarnate of thy pure blood in latter times, O most honored one.

Ode V

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Out of the night of ignorance the day of divine knowledge dawneth in the light of Thy countenance, O Christ. May Thy praise shine forth in our hearts like the light of the morn.

Emulating Him Who in His mercy died a voluntary death, O wise father, thou didst crucify thyself to the world and the passions, and hast been vouchsafed celestial life, O right glorious one.

Being meek, compassionate and peaceable, thou wast counted worthy of blessedness, as the inexhaustible bread of the hungry, the bestower of benefactions upon the poor, and the raiment of the naked.

Made beautiful by divine communings, like an angel thou didst serve God blamelessly as a hierarch, illumining the faithful with thy sacred teachings.

*Theotokion:* We hymn the all-pure Theotokos who without seed bore the God of all in her womb and gaveth birth to Him in the flesh for us, as the salvation of our souls.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Chastely desiring divine purity, O most wise, one, thou didst forsake all the passionate attachments of life.

Taught by the divine Unity, O thou who wast revealed by God, thou didst noetically attain unto contemplations higher than mere knowledge.

We know thee, O God-bearer, to be the cloud which doth inundate all ignorance with showers of knowledge.

*Theotokion:* Discovering thee like a lily shining amid the thorns, the Bridegroom loved thee, O Virgin Mother.

Ode VI

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief, for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Exercising thyself in supplication and fasting and entreating God in vigils, thou wast vouchsafed divine revelations and visions, O divinely wise and most rich one, taught by a purity which passeth understanding and comprehension, O wise one.

Thou didst live on earth as an angel with flesh, O father, joyously offering to the Creator the unbloody sacrifices of peace with faith and contrite heart and spirit, O blessed John.

Thy life, which shone forth more brightly than the sun, hath emitted beams of lovingkindness upon them that are in need, dispelling the dark cloud of poverty and warming them that are held fast in the cold of evils, O most rich and divinely inspired one.

*Theotokion:* Cease not to pray for us, O all-holy Virgin Theotokos, for thou art the confirmation of the faithful; we are strengthened by hope in thee and love for thee, and we unceasingly glorify Him Who was incarnate of thee.

Canon of the Venerable One

Irmos: \(same as that of the preceding canon\)

Adorned with the gift of wisdom and rendered comely by the splendor of thy life, thou becamest a godly sacred minister, mediating between Creator and creation; and thou wast a most radiant and eminent teacher, O father.

Having drawn nigh to the mount of the virtues and been covered with divine darkness, O father, thou didst receive from God divinely inscribed tablets of the dogmas, and hast been shown to be a second Moses, a law-giver of grace, O thou who art most rich.

Having mystically of thine own will consecrated thyself as a voluntary sacrificial victim, O Nilus, adorned with visions and spiritual activities, as thou standest before the Creator remember us that with faith keep thy memory.

*Theotokion:* Beholding the profundity of thy dread mysteries in the manifestations of figures, the prophets proclaimed beforehand that God would make His abode within thy womb, O all-immaculate one; and we, beholding the fulfillment of their prophecies, glorify thee.

Kontakion of the hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: "Seeking the highest…"—

Thou didst distribute thy wealth to the destitute, and hast now received heavenly riches, O John most wise. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we all honor thee, O namesake of almsgiving.

*Ikos:* Trusting in the mercy of God, O John, enriched with compassions and gifts by Him, thou didst thus show thyself to be merciful, having compassion upon all, like Him. Wherefore, taking pity on my poverty, grant me the riches of thy supplication, and fill thou my starving heart with godly words, O divinely wise one, as of old thou feddest the hungry, O namesake of almsgiving.

Ode VII

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The Hebrew children boldly trampled down the flame in the furnace and transformed the fire into dew, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

With deeds didst thou proclaim the words of the Savior, and as one merciful and pure of Spirit, O God-bearing father John, thou hast been joined to the choir of the blessed.

The taste of honey most sweet was transformed for thee into tried gold; for the Creator, remarking thy rich willingness, gaveth thee rich rewards.

Illumined by the unwaning light of the Trinity, O favorite of the Trinity, thou dost now enlighten them that honor thee and chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

*Theotokion:* Thee, O Theotokos, the joy of the apostles and glory of athletes, do we faithfully entreat: Of everlasting joy count us worthy who hymn thee unceasingly.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* The children that went down from Judea in Babylon once trod the flame of the furnace by their faith in the Trinity, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Watered by heavenly showers, O father, thou wast shown to be fertile, bringing forth for the Master most comely fruits, who cry out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Opening the flood-gates of dogmas, O most blessed one, thy tongue doth mightily deluge the falsehood of heresy, and it teacheth the faithful to chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

An angelic way of life didst thou lead on earth in thy body, O father; and delighting in the divine visions of heavenly sights, thou dost chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* For our salvation didst Thou reveal Thyself incarnate of the Virgin's womb. Wherefore, knowing Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, we cry out with thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Being vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, and observing Thy commandments exceedingly, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Revealing thee as a radiant star in the firmament of the Church, O father, through thee Christ enlighteneth them that sing with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Thou didst show thyself to be merciful, meek, right compassionate, guileless, the wealth of the poor, and the adornment and vesture of the naked, O father; and because of thine almsgiving and lovingkindness thou hast been called merciful more than all the saints who have shone forth in lovingkindness.

In sacred manner didst thou adorn the throne of Mark, especially with godly deeds, O father; and because of thine almsgiving and lovingkindness thou hast been called merciful more than all the saints who have shone forth in lovingkindness.

*Theotokion:* The daughter of fallen Adam wast thou shown to be, O Virgin, and the Mother of God Who hath restored my nature. Him let us hymn, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* When the musical instruments sounded and people innumerable worshipped the image in Dura, the three youths, refusing to obey the tyrant's command, hymned and glorified the Lord for all ages!

Having received perfect virtue and loved Him Who is first among the good, enlightened with the brilliance thereof thou now criest out: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Enriched by the art of knowledge, thou didst attain unto active glory, sending rays of grace upon them that cry out: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Fleeing the tumults of the world, thou didst reach the haven of quietude and didst slay the assaults of the passions, crying out: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Knowing well the Word of God Who was born of thee, O Virgin, we hymn thee most piously, chanting with faith: Hymn the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

Canon of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we truly confess thee to be the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the bodiless choirs.

Lo, after thy repose, O father, two of the holy fathers set thee in their midst, rendering thee most sacred honor in the tomb.

Like the dawn, like the day hath thy splendid repose shone forth, O father John, enlightening them that bless thee with faith.

Thou didst join the choirs of hierarchs, prophets, apostles and martyrs, O father; with them remember them that praise thee.

The shrine where thy sacred and holy relics lie, O father John, is a wellspring of miracles for them that have recourse unto thee.

*Theotokion:* O right beauteous Virgin, who gavest birth to the good God and Lord, do good to my soul which is afflicted with sin.

Canon of the Venerable One

*Irmos:* Heaven was struck with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed that God hath appeared to men in the flesh, and that thy womb hath become more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the legions of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

The destroyer, seeing thee breaking the bonds of earthly attachment and drawing nigh to God, O father, raised threefold waves of barbarians against thee, thinking to weaken thy might; but by divine providence thou didst set at nought his machinations, O most blessed one.

Shining with the divers rich rays of teachings, thou didst illumine the souls of them that have recourse to thee with faith in piety; for, touching to thy lips the cup of pure wisdom, O Nilus most wise, thou didst drink deeply and didst present it to them that love thee.

Ardently didst thou mystically sanctify thyself as an unblemished sacrifice to the Creator, O father, loving Him with sincerity. And standing now before His throne, O most blessed Nilus, do thou earnestly pray that they that celebrate thy memory with faith receive thy splendor.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst set right the fall of woman, O Virgin, having given birth to the Word Who setteth aright them that are cast down, in that He is good and mighty in power, Who was incarnate of thee in His surpassing lovingkindness, and hath saved the world by His passion-slaying sufferings.

Exapostilarion of the Hierarch: Spec. Mel.: "Hearken, ye women…"—

Emulating the mercy of the God of loving compassion, O John, thou didst distribute riches to the poor; wherefore, thou hast received inexhaustible riches in the heavens. Hence, we now entreat thee: Pray thou unceasingly in behalf of them that praise thee!

Glory…, Exapostilarion of the Venerable One: Spec. Mel.: "Heaven with stars…"—

Aspiring to the life of the angels, thou didst withdraw thyself to the desert; and having subdued the passions of the flesh, thou wast shown to be an equal of the angels, O our God-bearing father.

Now and ever…: Theotokion—

Thou wast the cause of the good things given by God to the world, O Theotokos. Do thou now render the kindly God merciful, for the salvation of all.

At the Aposticha: Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens. Thou hast destroyed legions of demons, and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Now and ever…: Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: "On the third day…"—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she that gaveth birth to Thee cried out: "What is this strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended in the flesh on the Tree, O Bestower of life?"

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia: four from the Octoechos, and four from Ode III of the canon of the holy hierarch.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Hebrews, §311 \(Heb 5: 4-10\)

Brethren: No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not Himself to be made a high priest; but He that said unto Him, Thou art My Son, today have I begotten Thee. As He saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Who in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto Him that was able to save Him from death, and was heard in that He feared; though He were a Son, yet learned He obedience by the things He suffered; and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey Him; called of God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgement.

*Stichos:* The law of God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel According to St. Luke, §24 \(Lk 6:17-23\)

And \[Jesus\] came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

