Also on The 14th Day of the Month of November

Commemoration of Our Father among the Saints

Gregory Palamas, Archbishop of Thessalonica,

the Wonderworker

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father…”—

O venerable father, sacred Gregory, thou didst spring forth as a branch from a God-loving and splendid root, and wast seen to be like a tree planted well by streams of divine waters, pouring forth beforehand the fruits of immortality, amazing every ear with thy substance, discourse and divine activities, an orator among orators, all-wise in the knowledge of God, entreating Christ, ever thirsting for Christ, ascending from divine glory to glory and from power to truly incorrupt power.

O venerable father, right wondrous Gregory, having forsaken those things which are transitory and drag one down, and loved those things which are incorrupt and heavenly, thou didst leave behind fleeting riches, O wise one, holding poverty to be lasting wealth; and having purified the eyes of thy soul with abstinence, tears and much weeping, thou wast thus shown to be a splendid vessel of the Spirit, wholly full of His grace. Ask thou that those who worship the one God, the almighty Trinity, may be granted His effulgence and His glory.

O venerable father, most sacred Gregory, having sharpened the sword of thy discourse with the Spirit, thou becamest as fire for the ranks of those who waged war upon God, felling and burning down their blasphemies like lightning falling from on high, but guiding all the faithful to the divine radiance of the threefold Sun, enlightened by Whom thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary equally enthroned and numbered with the preëminent theologians, with whom thou art praised and with whom thou abidest. And now pray that unity, peace and great mercy be given to the Church.

And 3 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Assembling together, with songs do we hymn thee as is meet: the inextinguishable lamp, the never-waning effulgence which saveth those who sail the seas, the calm and tranquil haven of grace; and we pray: from noetic storms deliver the Church by thy supplications, for thou didst manfully contend on its behalf.

O Gregory, thou spiritual breath of the voice of the Word, unquenchable and fiery tongue of theology, who by grace hath splendidly consumed the vile assembly of the heretics: We pray that we who hymn thee in Orthodox manner may by thine entreaties be delivered from the imposition of the enemies’ commands.

O father Gregory, as a radiant lamp for the Church doth Christ set thee, who first shone forth in labors and inner stillness, who with the Spirit thundered forth readily understandable and profound writings, and by thy supplications, discourses and the power of miracles dost illumine the whole world, making firm those who were not steadfast.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Having adorned thy discourse with wisdom and blameless virtue, O all-wise Gregory, in both thou wast wholly beautiful, noetically adorning and gladdening the people with thy God-proclaiming words, extending to them the \[doctrine of the\] one Godhead of the Trinity; wherefore, having trampled alien heresy underfoot with thine all-glorious teachings, thou didst raise up the might of the Faith in the end. Standing before Christ with His immaterial ministers, ask thou peace and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

The Prophet David, the forefather of God, for thy sake gave voice beforehand in psalmody concerning thee, unto Him Who in thee accomplished mighty works: the Queen stood at Thy right hand. For God Whose good pleasure it was to become incarnate of thee without father showed thee, His Mother, to be the mediatress of life, that He might renew His image which had become corrupt through the passions; and having found the sheep which had strayed among the mountains and become lost, He taketh it upon His shoulders and bringeth it to His Father; and Christ, Who is possessed of great and rich mercy, in accordance with His will, uniteth it with the hosts of heaven, and saveth the world, O Theotokos.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the light, she is found preëminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.

At the Aposticha, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

Rejoice, O father, thou beacon of Orthodoxy, radiant sun of the Church, boast of monastics and standard of the Church, excellent teacher of goodly works, holy hierarch Gregory, abode of wisdom and understanding, instrument of the Spirit for those near and far away, inspired composer of hymnody, mouth of the Lord, who leadest the worthy away from unworthiness! Entreat Christ, that He send down upon our souls peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Rejoice, O Gregory, thou exalted intelligence, beholder of mysteries, vessel of the Spirit bestowed upon us, radiant lamp, splendor of divine effulgence, mighty and honorable abode of love, who art truly meek, simple and guileless, revelation and manifestation of the Scriptures, sea of divine understandings, unfathomable abyss of the teaching of the Word of God! Entreat Christ, that He send down upon our souls peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

Rejoice, O holy hierarch Gregory, thou abyss of theology, steadfast rule of Orthodoxy for exalting the one exalted essence of the Trinity in a single will and activity, the simple, omnipotent and uncreated Godhead, thou who by the timeless grace of the Spirit didst put to shame those who reject deification, O mouth of theologians, glory of the divine fathers who art numbered among them, beacon of the Church, who by thy supplications dost grant us great mercy!

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Having set thy life aright in godly manner, O divinely revealed Gregory, thou didst adorn thine activity with vision; for having loved wisdom with divine desire, thou wast enriched with grace by the mouth of the Spirit. And exuding the sweetness of thy words like honey from the honeycomb, thou dost ever gladden the Church of Christ with divine understandings. Wherefore, dwelling in the heavens with the holy hierarchs, pray thou unceasingly for us who celebrate thy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the uprisings of the cruel demons against us, delivering us from every sorrow; for thee alone have we as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and we have acquired thine intercession; let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, O Mistress. Haste thou to answer the entreaty of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, and salvation of our souls!

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—

O wonderworker Gregory, instructor in Orthodoxy, adornment of holy hierarchs, invincible champion of theologians, great boast of Thessalonica, preacher of grace: Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin and, having endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, and as God revealed the resurrection: Disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee birth and prayeth for us; and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the holy hierarch, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Let us hymn the great Gregory, the godly hierarch of Christ, the pillar of fire and cloud of light who in the Spirit goeth before the new Israel by day and leadeth them to the noetic land of peace, to the city of the firstborn in Christ.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

All the fullness of the Godhead dwelt within thee, O pure Mistress, and, as Paul hath said, deified all the nature of corruptible men. Thou wast the beginning of such grace, and art saving guidance for those who honor thee with faith and love.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in the same tone & melody—

Having cleansed thy spirit well with torrents of thy tears, thou didst noetically receive divine grace, O right wondrous one. And in manner transcending nature thou camest to participate in the divinity of the Word Whom thou didst preach as one and uncreated, O divinely wise Gregory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O most splendid vessel of the noetic Light, dispel the darkness of my heart and ease the most heavy burden of the passions, I pray, guiding me to the paths of repentance, and vouchsafing me the light which is to come, O most blessed Mistress.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Gregory, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom—

Forsaking transitory things—the royal court, thy friends and kinsmen *—* O all-wise father Gregory, thou didst acquire those things which are abiding and constant, O blessed one; and thou didst bring all thy household and kin to the Master of all as an honorable wholeburnt offering; and guided thus thou didst dedicate thy soul, mind and body to God. O Gregory, earnestly pray to Him with vision and activity, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

Having put on thy flesh, in that He is good, O Mistress, the Master deified the servant’s form which He had assumed, and, uniting Himself to its substance and filling all of its nature with the Spirit, He made the assemblies of the saints by grace. Wherefore, we cry out to thee, accepting thee, who wast filled with the Spirit, as the first cause of ineffable works, and we hymn thee with all our soul: Rejoice, O beginning of our salvation! Rejoice, O release from offenses for those who with faith worship thine Offspring!

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 35 \(Jn. 9: 39-10: 9\)

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “For judgment I am come into this world, that those who see not might see; and that those who see might be made blind.” And some of the Pharisees who were with Him heard these words, and said unto Him: “Are we blind also?” Jesus said unto them: “If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, ‘We see’; therefore your sin remaineth. Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

With hymns of praise let us honor the preacher of true piety, the all-radiant star of the Church, the splendid luminary of Thessalonica, the disciple of the Light and friend of Christ, who soweth the divine word of piety in the hearts of all the faithful, who granteth salvation unto all and prayeth earnestly unto the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Canon of supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, the composition of Patriarch Philotheus, in Tone I—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for as almighty, O Immortal One, it smote the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

Having set thy mouth and mind to the Wellspring of gifts and spiritual wisdom, O all-glorious one, thou wast shown to be an abyss of grace. Grant thou a drop thereof unto me who hymn thee, O father.

Thou wast beyond nature a rule and law for monastic life, the divine mouth of theologians, holy hierarchs and teachers; wherefore, assembling together, we weave hymnody for thee.

Thou wast shown to be another Jeremiah, known from his mother’s womb, wholly inclined toward the Creator, wholly sanctified, O God-bearer; wherefore, thy mouth received the words of God.

Standing before the throne of God with the angels, O God-seer Gregory, thou dost now manifestly receive the unapproachable radiance. Pray that we may be released from the darkness of sin, we beseech thee.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to behold the Light Who shone forth from thy womb, O Theotokos, Gregory set thee before the Creator as his advocate, and through thee hath received the grace he desired.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Thou Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having in Thy mercy formed Thyself therein: Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant to Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou didst consider worldly wisdom to be ­foolishness, O all-wise one, and didst love the ­foolishness of the Cross; and taking it upon thy shoulder, thou didst show, as Paul said, that it is by foolishness that the wisdom of this world is overcome.

Fleeing men, O father, with all thy soul thou didst love poverty, humility, want and unacquisitiveness; wherefore, thou wast driven into the wilderness, and ever, in the fragrance of thy peace, thou didst cry out unto Christ: I hasten after Thee!

With all manner of ascetic feats and weeping thou didst mortify the old, corruptible man, O all-wise one, cleansing thyself thoroughly with fountains of tears; and by thy manner of life thou didst receive again thine ancient beauty in Christ, and didst clothe thyself in the new man.

O ye multitudes of monks, together with those standing here today, all ye priests and benefactors, with beauteous voices and divine words let us praise Gregory, our common teacher, who hath adorned us with his works and discourses.

*Theotokion:* Having through the intercession of the Mother of God beheld the radiance of the Spirit which thou desired, thou art now more brilliantly illumined thereby. Pray thou that the darkness of the passions within us may be replaced with the light of grace.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

By abstinence, weeping and prayer, by spiritual activity, poverty and thorough washing with tears, thou didst purify thy heart, O Gregory; and, wholly caught up, thou wast united to Christ in spirit. Wherefore, like Paul, having heard ineffable things and become a chosen vessel, thou didst bear the name of Christ, and didst exaltedly preach the one, simple and uncreated Godhead, to Whom do thou never cease to pray, that thy flock may be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O compassionate Word of God, Who in the beginning brought the things of nature into being out of non-existence, and Who by Thy hand honored with thine image man who corrupted it through the deception of the serpent, but Who set it aright by Thy precious Cross: Thou hast sanctified all nature by Thy Holy Spirit and by assuming the flesh. O Master Christ our God, through the supplications of Thy Mother, grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship Thy might.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee, for our salvation and restoration.

Having wounded the moonless night and darkness of the passions with the staff of prayer, as Moses did to Egypt, thou didst hasten supernaturally to divine vision, and hast become for us a law-giver.

Having ascended the divine heights of the virtues, as the friends and disciples of Christ on Tabor, O father Gregory, thou didst behold Him revealing His natural and divine glory; and, deified, thou wast shown to be like another sun.

O God-seer Gregory, having become an initiate of the mysteries of the Godhead and a partaker of ineffable things, thou dost articulate the mystery of theology, declaring God to be one and uncreated in power and nature, and composed of three Persons.

*Theotokion:* With sacred discourses thou didst hymn her who gave birth to the ineffable Word of God and with splendor didst proclaim the mystery of the incarnation. And the Church doth now beg her to preserve it unbeset by storms.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

The great Mind, the ineffable Abyss of wisdom, found thee, O God-bearer, to be an abode of intelligence friendly toward Him; and He hath given thee to the Church as an instrument of understanding and wisdom.

Shining thee forth as a brilliant ray first on Athos, O Gregory, God bestoweth thee upon the splendid city \[of Thessalonica\], sanctifying and paternally setting him forth through His divinely moving light.

Having found thee to be a divine gift from God and an inexhaustible treasure, the mighty capital of Thessaly calleth its neighbors to partake of thy words and miracles, O blessed one.

O ye who desire Gregory’s struggle and his words of grace, offering hymnody now unto him let us beseech him through whose prayer the Creator and Master is moved to mercy for all.

*Theotokion:* He Who enlightened the vast expanse of the earth with the radiance of the sun hath been shown to be a never-setting Sun amid the darkness, O Virgin. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us from the darkness of evil and sin, O Mistress.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah, whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

O Gregory, thy deified life hath truly been seen by the faithful as a rule of virtue, thy discourse and precepts as a guide to piety, whereby they judge their own fruitfulness or barrenness, proclaiming the one almighty and uncreated God.

Thou hast been shown to us as great, O Gregory, piously preaching the one Godhead in three Persons but a single Essence and power, in all ways simple and uncreated; and thou didst mightily put to shame all who foolishly say that the Godhead is created.

Thou dost denounce the thought of the mindless Acindynus, as thou didst that of Barlaam before; for, enamored of the myths of the ancient Greeks, they made the Godhead into a creature, and like the Jews dishonored the dignity of the Son of God.

Having produced rules of precepts and brilliant discourses, whereby thou didst open the minds of the honored theologians to the Spirit, O Gregory, by thy supplications preserve the Church of Christ unshaken, delivering it from all heresy.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the throne of the cherubim and all the celestial hosts, and every rank of heaven, O Mistress, for thou wast the ineffable throne of the divine Being of God. In that He is thy Son, move Him to mercy toward me who hymn thee with faith.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

O divinely eloquent Gregory, together we hymn thee, the sacred and divine instrument of wisdom, the brilliant clarion of theology. And as a mind standing before the primal Mind, O father, guide thou our mind unto Him, that we may cry: Rejoice, O preacher of grace!

*Ikos:* Thou didst appear on earth as an angel, proclaiming the divine tidings of ineffable things unto corruptible men; for, living with the mind and body of a man but with the voice of the incorporeal beings, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst amaze and cause them to cry out to thee such things as these: Rejoice, thou for whose sake the Light was proclaimed; rejoice, thou for whose sake the darkness was dispelled! Rejoice, herald of the uncreated Godhead; rejoice, thou who truly denounced the foolish teaching that the Essence of God is created! Rejoice, surpassing height who spake of the Essence of God; rejoice, depth which the eyes cannot easily plumb, who told of spiritual activity! Rejoice, for thy words concerning the glory of God were good; rejoice, for thou didst reject the reasonings of the wicked! Rejoice, luminary who hast shown us the Sun; rejoice, vessel and receptacle of the divine Food! Rejoice, thou through whom the truth shineth forth; rejoice, thou by whom falsehood hath been cast into darkness! Rejoice, O preacher of grace!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for, as the supremely Exalted One saved the three youths, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

Those held captive by deception are unable to gaze directly upon the lightning of thy precepts and divine and awesome words, for these are like the voice of thunder, O father, and like blind men the mindless ones, milling about, now sense them to be walls, as it is written.

Night is devoid of light for the disobedient; but now the one Light hath dawned, the kingdom of the glory of God, which He Who loveth mankind revealed on Tabor to the initiates of His mysteries, O Gregory. And having partaken sufficiently thereof, thou joinest in fellowship with those who have pleased God.

Having put to shame those who impiously blaspheme against grace, divine inner stillness and prayer, and who vilely mock ineffable deification, thou didst drive them from the divine fold, which thou dost ever preserve by thine entreaties.

*Theotokion:* Come thou now unto our aid, O Mistress, our common salvation, accepting the supplications of Gregory, lulling to sleep the passions of our souls and bodies, and speedily releasing us from general tumult and corruption.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O father, thou hast been shown to be wholly radiant, sweet, upright, and meek, pouring forth for those who approach thee with faith the sweet and divine beverage of thy discourses, which gladdeneth the hearts of all the pious, giving drink to the senses of the souls of the infirm.

Finding thy mind and tongue to be truly noble, and thine instruction, words and heart purified, the Wisdom of God made His abode in thee, O father; and as they touched one another, He awesomely showed thee forth as a wonder to all the world.

The might of piety showed forth the Hebrew children as unharmed in the furnace, O all-wise one; and emulating them, thou didst restrain the flame of impiety in the midst of the furnace of temptations, valiantly hymning the Master and utterly consuming those who persecuted thee.

Thou didst drown the noetic Pharaoh in the torrents of thy tears and didst engulf the whole army of Egypt; and thou didst ascend the mountain of dispassion, driving thence the hordes of the enemy with the power of the Spirit, like Moses the great.

*Theotokion:* The splendid preacher of grace, the theologian of the Spirit given through thee to the world, O pure Theotokos, celebrating now with discourses, as a faithful servant assembleth all choirs to chant hymns and songs unto thee, glorifying thy memory.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* The bush which burnt with fire yet was not consumed showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving. And now we pray that the furnace of temptations which rageth against us may be extinguished, that we may magnify thee unceasingly, O Theotokos.

Standing before the throne of the unoriginate and three-Sunned Godhead, and filled to sufficiency through spiritual activity with the grace which thou didst hymn, as a fellow laborer be thou mindful of thy friends, who now commemorate thee.

Thou didst find the reward for thine efforts, O father *—* the unoriginate kingship of God which thou didst piously preach on earth; and thou didst receive the three-stranded wreath of divine confession, priesthood and inner stillness.

Thou hast been shown to be the boast of monastics, a godly theologian and a renowned standard for the priesthood; wherefore, divine grace bestoweth miracles upon thee, confirming thy words.

Having truly left behind the law of praises and the struggle of discourses, both while living on earth and after departing the body, O all-glorious one, yet do thou most especially accept this meager hymnody, and by thy supplications grant the petitions of those who desire thee.

*Theotokion:* Thine honored servant Gregory was the tongue of theology for the mouth of thy dread Offspring, the Deity Who appeared through thee in manner transcending nature, O Mistress. And accepting now his entreaties, save us all.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples…”—

Rejoice, boast of the fathers, mouth of theologians, abode of inner stillness, house of wisdom, might of teachers, abyss of discourse! Rejoice, instrument of activity, summit of vision, healer of the passions and sicknesses of men! Rejoice, habitation of the Holy Spirit, both when thou wast alive and now since thy death, O father!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, mediatress of joy! Rejoice, annulment of the curse! Rejoice, resurrection of Adam! Rejoice, fall of the demons! Rejoice, abolition of the shame of women! Rejoice, emptying of hell, corruption of death and sanctification of human nature! Rejoice, O Virgin, rejoice, O Mistress! Rejoice, O Mother of God!

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O sacred father Gregory, having loved God from childhood, thou didst hate all passionate attachment to the material world and peace which abideth not. And, valiantly taking up thy cross, thou didst follow after thy Master; and, cleansing thy mind and soul with weeping and tears, thou becamest wholly divine.

O sacred father Gregory, having purified thy heart well with vision and spiritual activity, thou becamest an abode of the Spirit; and, having received His effulgence, thou wast truly shown forth as light to those who approached thee. Lo! thou becamest a child of the Light through grace, O glorious one, that thou mightest not be separated from the divine Essence itself.

O divinely wise father Gregory, thou didst dig out the most evil seed and root, with the axe of the Spirit didst cut down the vile Barlaam, the betrayer of the Faith, and the vain-minded Acindynus, his fellow initiate; and, expelling the heretics from the fullness of the Church of God, thou didst reckon them among the blasphemous Jews, for they were zealous for the mindlessness thereof.

O divinely wise father Gregory, thou didst cleanse thy soul, eluding the unclean devil by thine intelligence; and, truly glorious in thy majesty, thou didst commit thy spirit unto Christ our God.

Glory…, in Tone I—

O Gregory, valiant struggler for the Orthodox Faith, who contended like a mighty warrior of Christ God and pleased thy Commander, thou hast now fought the good fight within the Church, preserving it on an immovable foundation by thy teachings.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! Rejoice, boast of all the world! Rejoice, O all-pure and blessed Mother of God!

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318 \(Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\)

Brethren, such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for His own sins, and then for the people’s: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Gospel according to John, § 36 \(Jn. 10: 9-16\)

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

