The 17th Day of the Month of November

Commemoration of Our Father among the saints, Gregory the Wonderworker, Bishop of Neocæsarea

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “What shall we call thee...”—

What shall we call thee, O Gregory? Master, for thou didst subject the passions to thy mind! Husbandman, for thou didst reap the fruit of wisdom! One who hath been vouchsafed vision divine, and hath been catechized with heavenly theology; a most sacred performer of the mysteries and most wondrous worker of miracles. Pray thou that our souls be saved. *Twice*

What shall I call thee now, O Gregory? Mighty destroyer of godless impiety, one who doth establish the laws of piety, wise teacher, and bestower of invincible peace, unvanquished overthrower of armies, thou who ever abidest in the mountains and lookest down upon those who are in the cities. Pray thou that our souls be saved. *Twice*

What now shall I proclaim thee, O venerable one? Emulator of the apostles, as a worker of miracles, who restrained the river by the invocation of Christ and dried up the lake which was the cause of contention between brethren, who dispersed the synagogue opposed to God, and increased and enlightened Christian assemblies. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

What now shall I proclaim thee, O venerable one? Guide of those who are astray and physician of the ailing, bestower of an abundance of necessities upon those who ask, most mighty persecutor of demons, one who urged the struggle of martyrdom, and was prophetically illumined with graces, O right glorious one. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Having most wisely entered the depths of knowledge, O hierarch of Christ, thou didst acquire the vision of the Trinity; foreseeing unwaveringly Christ our God in the Spirit, thou dost pour forth upon us an abyss of miracles, having made the watery nature of the sea solid and changed the pagan priest’s dark delusion into belief, thou didst persuade the persecutors to believe truly and didst show thyself to them as a pillar of the virtues of piety; and through thy miracles thou wast called a prophet. Wherefore, we beseech thee, cease thou never to entreat the Savior in our behalf, that our souls be saved.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day...”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What strange mystery is this that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended upon a Tree in the flesh, O Bestower of life?”

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos; and Glory..., in Tone VI—

The wakefulness of God was given thee, O wise one, as it had been given to Daniel; for, as a dream was revealed to him, so was the mystery of the Faith disclosed to thee. Wherefore, O venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion—

The all-pure one, as she beheld Thee suspended upon the Cross, cried out, weeping maternally: “O my Son and my God, my sweetest Child, how can I endure Thy shameful suffering?”

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

By vigilance in prayer and persistence in the working of miracles, thou didst acquire the name of thy worthy deeds. Pray thou to Christ God, O father Gregory, that He enlighten our souls, lest we sleep unto death.

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos without the martyria, and that of the saint, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I shall weave praise for Gregory the wonderworker,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

O father Gregory, show forth now splendidly the divine activity of thy wonders within me, delivering me from the abyss of my transgressions and enlightening me with thy radiance, that I may hymn thee as is meet, O blessed one.

As one who is skillful, sensible and wise, thou didst prefer nobility of soul to the passions of the flesh, O blessed one, industriously assembling the dogmas of wisdom whereby the soul that draweth nigh to God is nourished, O Gregory.

When thou hadst acquired chastity as a sister, as a good companion, O Gregory, the wicked serpent, beholding thee, raised up hatred against thee. But thou didst put him to shame, O father, by thy long-suffering, healing the woman who was held fast in the clutches of passion.

Residing in a strange land, O venerable one, in thy virtue thou wast manifest to all as honorable, pious and God-loving, having received the gift of working miracles from God, whereby thou hast been known, O divinely eloquent one, shining forth in the world like the sun.

*Theotokion:* Thou wast put forth as a shoot from a royal root, O pure one, and, in manner past comprehension and understanding, of thy pure blood thou didst give birth unto Christ the King, the incarnate Word of God, Who is of two natures, yet a single hypostasis.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Having cleansed thy mind of the turbulence of the passions, and, being full of vision most wise, thou wast shown to be magnificent, an abode of wisdom, and wast enriched with the gift of prophecy, O Gregory.

Being conversant in the divinely inspired Scriptures, O most blessed one, and having clearly chosen a different way of life, thou didst establish within thyself the single image of virtue, O divinely wise Gregory.

O divinely revealed one, having obtained the mystery of theology through divine initiation, enlighten us, that we may honor the Trinity consubstantial, one in essence, uncreated and equally eternal.

Instructed by God, in that thou didst seek Him with love, thou didst have the pure Theotokos Mary and the son of thunder as instructors in the mysteries, guiding thee to the light of the Trinity, O divinely eloquent one.

*Theotokion:* O pure Maiden, we all know thee to be the staff which budded forth Christ, the Flower of incorruption, and the golden censer who held in thine arms the burning Coal of the divine Essence, O divinely blessed one.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Of the divine faith...”—

Thou wast a new Moses in thy works, receiving the tablets of faith on the mountain of mystical divine revelation, setting down as law for the people the piety of the mystery of the Trinity, O Gregory. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, honor thy memory, asking for great mercy through thee. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever..., Theotokion—

Thou wast a divine tabernacle of the Word, O only pure Virgin Mother, who hast surpassed the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications do thou cleanse me who, more than all others, have been defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, granting me great mercy.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

The incorrupt Virgin Mother, the unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, beholding Him Who budded forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, lamenting maternally, cried out: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest willingly, wishing to deliver men from the indignity of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Having ploughed the good earth, O divinely wise father, and sown the seed of the Word, thou dost even now evangelically increase thy yield an hundredfold, O Gregory, by thy teachings bringing to God those who chant: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Shining forth like lightning, O father, thy life hath dispelled the deception of the demons; for their darkness could not withstand the light of thy virtues. Wherefore, the minister of spiritually pernicious deception, moved like the stone he beheld, was enlightened.

Thou wast vouchsafed to behold the darkness of most divine Light, O father, and, having received the divinely written law like Moses, thou didst attain the precision of theology. Hence, thou hast been shown to be a law-giver of the Church of Christ, O divinely wise Gregory.

Having turned away from the foolish talk of the rhetors and being enlightened by the word of grace, O father, thou didst truly receive the apostles’ power over the demons, for the prince of darkness fled before thy brilliant splendor.

*Theotokion:* From of old the ark prefigured thee, O all-immaculate one, who received within thy womb the divinely written Law, ineffably conceiving the life-creating Word, Who doth richly nourish the souls of those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Ode V

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Having harrowed hardened hearts with the husbandry of thy words, thou didst cast upon them the divine seed, O hierarch, and didst produce an abundant harvest, the salvation of the faithful, for the Deliverer, O divinely eloquent one.

Phædimus, the servant of God, aflame with zeal, piously trusting in God, Who knoweth all things, and in thine honorable life, O divinely eloquent father Gregory, anointed thee even though thou hadst not come to him.

With the streams of thy precepts thou didst quench idolatrous immolations, and didst make the faithful firm through thy teachings, O most wise one, having, like Samuel, ascended the mountain through visions, and being also like an oak in thy steadfastness.

O divinely wise and holy hierarch, by thy prayers deliver me from evil and grievous circumstances, and rend asunder the record of my transgressions, O father, for thou art a priest who hast received from God the power to loose transgressions.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou wast adorned with the all-pure beauties of thy virginity, and thou didst cover the misshapen shame of the first Eve, having given birth to Christ, Who bestoweth upon those who honor thee the garment of immortality.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

The lake which was the cause of contention between brethren didst thou dry up in miraculous fashion; and thou didst cause the rushing of the river to cease, O most wise one, for when thou didst plant thy staff, it took root and grew at thy divine behest, O Gregory.

Godly zeal consumed thee, O thou who art most rich in grace, for, unable to endure the sight of an insult to God, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst destroy the vain-minded by thy prayers.

The wretched and ungodly Jew, who wished to destroy thee, did himself die, showing thee forth as a fulfiller of the dogmas of God, Who doth glorify thee, O divinely wise Gregory.

*Theotokion:* The Spirit, Who worketh all things, came down upon thee, O all-immaculate one, and the Word of God made His abode within thee, ineffably becoming flesh, yet remaining unchanged.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “Seeking the highest...”—

Receiving the power to work many miracles, thou didst terrify the demons with awesome signs, and didst dispel the diseases of men, O most wise Gregory. And thou wast called the wonderworker, receiving this title from thy works.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

The boast of the fathers and pride of the holy teachers, the luminary of the Church and immovable pillar of piety hast thou been shown to be, O Gregory, who criest out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Shining forth in miracles, thou didst enlighten the whole world, O divinely wise Gregory; wherefore, having assembled together, we bless thee, nurtured by thy words and chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

O divinely wise one, thou hast poured forth healing upon all the infirm; for most abundant and wonder-working grace was poured into thy mouth, whereby thou didst cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Now are all things full of divine light through thee, O all-pure one; for thou art shown to be the door through which God hath communed with the world, enlightening those who cry with faith: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Enriched by thee with the radiance of the consubstantial and worshipful Trinity and celebrating now thy festival, O Gregory, we ask to be illumined with wonder-working grace, crying aloud to the Master: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Receiving the radiance of the sovereign Godhead like a newly revealed mirror, thou hast illumined the world with rays of light, sending down Orthodoxy upon those who melodiously chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Protected by God, O most wise one, thou wast preserved in hiding on the mountain for those who honor God, as a source of piety, like another Moses the law-giver; and thou didst teach them to hymn the Creator and Deliverer, singing: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Thou wast the abode of the never-waning Light, O all-pure one, shining with the beauties of virginity and illumining all who from the depths of their souls confess thee to be the true Theotokos and who chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Shining with the light of thy most exemplary life, thou dost now stand before the great Light, crowned as a victor with divinely wrought miracles, O divinely wise wonderworker, venerable hierarch, father Gregory, thou beacon of the Church and adornment of the Orthodox.

In thy supplications do thou now beg that the royal chosen and sanctified priesthood be guided aright, O wonderworker, and ask thou that they who now faithfully celebrate thy memory receive the Kingdom of heaven and that they be vouchsafed divine gladness.

Having put down the attacks of the demons and subdued carnal-mindedness, O wonderworker, as a venerable and guileless hierarch, arrayed in the vesture of righteousness, thou dost stand before the throne of the King of all with boldness, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother of God, thou art revealed as she who, in manner transcending nature, gave birth in the flesh to the good Word, Whom the Father poured forth from His heart before all ages, in that He is good. Him do we now know as more exalted than all bodies, even though He hath been clothed in a body.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Thou didst shine forth in miracles, O wonderworker Gregory, and didst deliver the pagan priest from corruption and demonic deception by moving a stone at thy command; and, having dried up a lake, thou didst restrain a river. Wherefore, we all praise thee together, O thrice-blessed one.

Theotokion, in the same melody—

Rejoice, thou boast of the faithful, confirmation of the venerable! Rejoice, glory of the righteous! Rejoice, thou light of those who are in darkness! Rejoice, most holy temple! Rejoice, paradise of God! Rejoice, lifting of the curse, O blessed Mary!

Aposticha from the Octoechos, and this sticheron of the saint, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed in righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Having received the election of the priesthood from God and been vested in a divine robe from on high, thou didst show forth those who before were children of unbelief to be children and heirs of the light; for the grace of the wisdom of God was poured forth in thy mouth, O most blessed Gregory, doer of most glorious deeds. Wherefore, now, on the day of thy commemoration, entreat Christ God in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Filled with awe by the hierarch renowned for his wonders, inanimate things were altered; for a lake which was the cause of dissension between two brethren dried up, and a staff grew, restraining a river; and a stone moved at thy command, leading the unbelieving to knowledge of God. For his sake, O God, grant our souls great mercy.

Now & ever..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder...”—

“What vision is this which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who sustainest all creation art hung upon a tree, and diest, granting life unto all.” Thus did the Theotokos say, lamenting, when she saw lifted up upon the Cross the God and man Who had ineffably shone forth from her.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 4 troparia from the Octoechos, and 4 from Ode III of the canon to the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians, §151 \(12:7-11\)

Brethren: The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

*Stichos:* For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation for Himself.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. Matthew, §34, from the midpoint \(10:1, 5-8\)

At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: “Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

