The 18th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The Holy Martyrs

Plato & Romanus

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the martyr Plato, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

Full of valiant wisdom, with a most courageous resolve thou didst endure the severing of thy limbs and the dismemberment of thy body, unbearable fire, starvation and death, in expectation of the glory which ageth not with time, which lieth eternally before thee, and foreseeing everlasting blessedness.

Having transcended every sense and directed thy mind toward life on high, with divinely wise thought and great wisdom of soul thou didst spurn the baseness and lowliness of visible things. Wherefore, lacerated and burned with fire for Christ, O martyr, thou didst endure valiantly.

Every assault of the enemy and the onslaughts of the persecutors didst thou set at nought by grace; and thou wast crowned with the wreath of victory, O thou who art most rich, being vouchsafed incorruptible gladness and ineffable and divine radiance. And as thou art now in the midst thereof, ask remission of sins for those who praise thee well.

And 3 stichera of the martyr Romanus, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Consumed by fasting, hardened by ascetic endeavor, and tormented with manifold tortures, thou becamest a two-edged sword, cutting down hordes of demons, O Romanus, thou adornment of athletes, divine boast, precious ornament of the Church of those who died shedding their own blood, O most lauded one.

Lacerated and rent asunder, imprisoned in a dungeon, thy tongue cut out, O glorious athlete, thy jaw broken, receiving a blessed end through violent suffocation, thou wast shown to be unshakable and steadfast through the activity of the divine Spirit, O Romanus; wherefore, we praise thee with faith.

A child speaketh eloquently and amazeth the mindless: he is adorned with honorable opposition and is illumined by his death; he is enriched by the goodly fame of the holy athletes, whose zeal he acquired. O right wise Romanus, pray thou with them, that remission of debts be sent down upon us all.

Glory…: Idiomelon, in Tone VI—

Awesome and all-glorious are the victories of Thy martyr, O Lord! For, emulating the boldness of the fishermen, by his words and deeds he rent asunder the mythology and historical blasphemy of Plato with the nets of theology; and when his skin was flayed and his head cut off, he choked the enemy with the outpouring of his blood. O most blessed wonder-worker Plato, thou adornment of the martyrs, who preached the great name of Christ with boldness, ask that great mercy be given our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried aloud: “What is this strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended in the flesh upon the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at nought the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. Through their supplications, save Thou our souls.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon of the martyr Plato, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the expanse of thy praises, O Plato”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

Traversing the most pure expanse of the eternal kingdom, O glorious one, from all tribulation and the dangers of imprisonment save those who hymn thee, leading to the path to heaven those who walk without turning back.

Protected by the armor of piety, and having shown thyself to be an unshakable pillar, O Plato, thou didst endure all the savagery of wounds and didst accept the pangs of imprisonment, exalted by grace divine.

Showing forth the mettle of youth, in thy suffering thou didst cast off mortal and corruptible coarseness, O most wise one, and, arrayed in the garment of incorruption, thou standest, rejoicing, before the Master.

*Theotokion:* In manner past understanding thou gavest birth to the incarnate and only-begotten Word, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos. Wherefore, reasoning correctly, we proclaim and most honorably glorify thee.

Canon of the martyr Romanus, the acrostic whereof is: “With athletes’ wreaths I crown thee, O Romanus”, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the depths of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, Israel of old vanquished the might of Amalek in the wilderness by Moses’ arms stretched out in the form of the Cross.

Shining brightly with the never-waning radiance of the Trinity, and enlightened with the choirs of athletes, O Romanus, send thou enlightenment upon me, driving away the darkness of the passions with thy supplications, which are acceptable to God.

Unmoved by the raging waves of the sea of idolatry, in that thou wast set firmly upon Christ the rock, thou didst destroy the threefold billows of most seditious ungodliness with the calm of the divine Spirit.

The Church of Christ, which aboundeth in every good thing, O Romanus, didst thou preserve untouched by the wolves, like a right glorious and right fruitful meadow, making it steadfast by thy teaching.

*Theotokion:* Truly, human nature hath found mercy through thee, O all-immaculate one; for the Creator, having become incarnate of thee in manner past recounting and understanding, was led to death for us, delivering us from hades.

Ode III

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Manifestly aflame with the zeal of piety, and enlightened by the divine fire of the Faith, O most blessed one, with endurance thou didst enter into the cruel flame like a spark of incorruption.

Having supernaturally vanquished the servants of the demons, and borne with patience the pain of mighty tortures, O blessed and divinely wise Plato, thou wast shown to be a dweller with the angels and a crown-bearer.

Having struggled for Christ on earth, O most blessed one, receiving from Him heavenly gifts and crowns which abide forever, thou dwellest in the pure land of paradise.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, thou art the portal of the Light, adorned with the rays of the light of the Spirit; for through thee descended unto us the Word Who illumineth with divine light all who hymn thee.

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my strength, O Lord, my refuge and my consolation!

Having slain the spiritual beast with the sling of thy words, O Romanus, thou didst preserve the flock of Christ uncorrupted by the evil of idolatry.

Rendered mighty by the armor of the Cross, thou didst repel the assaults of the enemy and didst denounce their impotence, O wise and right blessed Romanus.

When thy cheek was lacerated for Christ, O glorious, blessed and ever-memorable Romanus, thou didst cast down the enemy, breaking their jaws.

*Theotokion:* Clothed in the flesh He received from thee, He Who alone is God by nature, the Word of the Father, Who is one in essence with the Spirit, hath deified mortals, O Mother of God.

Sessional hymn of the martyr Plato, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Exalted in the breadth of thy struggles, O wise martyr, thou didst destroy the snares of the enemy, discomfiting them, O most glorious one; and having run well the divine course, thou didst reach the expanse of heaven, rejoicing. Wherefore, resplendent today in the expanse of piety, the Church doth celebrate thy memorial, O blessed one, and crieth out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…: Sessional hymn of the martyr Romanus, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Having trampled the wicked one underfoot by fasting, thou wast glorified by suffering, O martyr of Christ, having endured manfully with perfect resolve. Wherefore, thou hast been numbered among the choirs of martyrs and hast reached the everlasting kingdom. Joining chorus therein, be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy holy memory with faith.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

After God it is to thy divine protection that I, the lowly, flee, O Theotokos; and falling down, I pray: O all-pure one, have mercy, for my sins have risen over my head, and I fear torment and tremble, O Mistress. Offer entreaty to thy Son, O pure one, that He deliver me therefrom.

Stavrotheotokion—

She who in latter times gave birth in the flesh unto Thee, Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, O Christ, beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross, cried out: “O Jesus, my most beloved Son, how is it that Thou, Who art glorified as God by the angels, art now crucified by iniquitous men? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Wholly transformed by the love of thy Creator, thou didst not feel the pain of thy body, having shed the skin garments of thy flesh of the passions and mortality and clad thyself in the robe of chastity and salvation.

Thou didst show thyself to be a priest of God, offering thyself unto Christ the Deliverer Who was slain for all, as an unblemished lamb and a perfect sacrifice, O martyr; for, having set thy soul afire with love for the Master, thou didst pay no heed to thy burning flesh.

Emulating the three youths who were in Babylon, thou didst not fear the all-devouring fire, but didst mightily and youthfully endure the unbearable flame thereof. Wherefore, the Bestower of dew hath rightly taken thee with them into the chamber of glory.

*Theotokion:* In that thou art the royal root, thou gavest birth for us unto the Word of God Who reigneth over all, Who became flesh, yet remained unchanged. Wherefore, O most holy Virgin, with truth and authority we glorify thee, the Theotokos.

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, O Sun of righteousness, the Church stood rooted in place, crying out as is meet: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

With ineffable beauty thou didst ascend the tree, mounting it like a stairway, O blessed one, and didst attain unto the everlasting choir, O right glorious martyr Romanus.

Having shed thy mortal garments amid thy tortures, O blessed one, thou didst array thyself splendidly in a garment of light, O most glorious martyr Romanus.

Made wise by the inspiration of the Comforter, the tongue of the boy proclaimed Thee to be the Lord of glory, the Creator of all and God Who is able to save, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

*Theotokion:* Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin, whereby all peoples of the world have been delivered from the curse of death; and blessed by thee, we hymn thee as the mediatress of Life.

Ode V

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Thou gavest neither slumber to thine eyelids, nor sleep to thine eyes, O martyr, until, beheaded by the sword, thou didst sleep the sleep of the blessed like those who love God, O blessed one.

Suffering, thou didst struggle as in another’s body, O most blessed one; thou didst suffer, viewing thy pangs as though another was experiencing them. For, set afire with divine zeal, thou didst not fear the future torments, O glorious one.

Thou hast discovered riches which cannot be taken away, and unfading glory, joining chorus with the angels in the mansions of heaven, partaking of incorruptible immortality, O most eminent one.

*Theotokion:* By thy supplications grant remission of sins to thy servants, delivering them from temptations, misfortunes and sorrows, and from enslavement to blasphemous heretics, O most lauded Virgin Theotokos.

Canon of the Venerable Romanus

*Irmos:* Thou hast come, O my Lord, as a light into the world: a holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance those who hymn Thee with faith.

With the martyric streams of thy blood thou didst flood the sea of ungodliness; and thou hast poured forth rivers of healing, O Romanus.

O Romanus, thou didst offer to the Master as a choice gift, an unblemished sacrifice, the slain boy Varulus who uttered theology.

Thou didst wound the foolishness of the enemy with the wisdom of the Holy Spirit, as he inflicted wounds upon thy body, O most glorious Romanus.

*Theotokion:* In that thou gavest birth unto Joy, O Virgin Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou hast annulled the curse and restored men through thy birthgiving.

Ode VI

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Transcending sufferings and tortures, thou didst endure the cutting away of thy flesh, O glorious one; for thou didst have Christ as thy Helper, Assistant and Companion.

Ever gazing upon the majesty of the Creator with spiritual understanding, and contemplating ineffable beauty, thou didst spurn the baseness of visible things.

*Theotokion:* As an animate ark thou didst hold the Bestower of life, as a holy temple thou didst receive the Holy One Who had become man, for the good of men, O most blessed one.

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Having shed mortality and corruption with a shrug and arrayed thyself in the beauty of life incorruptible, O Romanus, thou wast adorned with never-diminishing spiritual splendors.

Thy severed tongue pouring forth torrents of blood like teachings, O passion-bearer, thou didst thereby inherit the imperishable blessedness which abideth forever.

Thirsting for a stream of wisdom, by the counsel of his mother thou didst pour drink into the mouth of the boy who uttered theology, and who entered into the endless life by the sword.

*Theotokion:* Be thou a ready refuge for me, O all-pure Mother of God, delivering me from violence, taking from me the shame of the passions and guiding me to the godly path.

Kontakion of the martyr Plato, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Thy holy memory doth gladden the whole world, summoning all the faithful to thine all-honorable temple, where, assembled now with joy, we chant in hymns amid splendor. Wherefore, O Plato, we cry out to thee: Deliver thy city from the invasion of the heathen, O holy one.

*Ikos:* Having abandoned all pagan superstition, the divinely wise Plato came to love the soul-saving teachings of the disciples of Christ. Wherefore, he appeared honorable to all, like an anchor of the Faith in his native land, and manifestly bore the title “of Ancyra.” For, nurtured well, it ever findeth him to be an excellent protection against the enemy and a fervent helper in battle, crying out: Deliver thy city from the invasion of the heathen, O holy one!

Ode VII

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

He Who set down the law hath crowned with a wreath of victory thee who suffered lawfully and trampled thine enemies underfoot, and who cried aloud, saying: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst pass over, rejoicing, to Him Whom thou didst desire from of old, emulating His all-pure sufferings, which were the cause of men’s salvation; and thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

All the hosts of heaven, and the people then looking on, marvelled at thy patient endurance of suffering; for thy severed tongue supernaturally cried out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the bonds of death and the curse of first-created Adam by the divine Offspring of thy virginity, O all-pure one, mindful that thou art the Theotokos, we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, afire with love of piety more than with the flame, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Having choked the serpent with thy strangulation, O passion-bearer, thou didst truly find life, O all-glorious Romanus, ever crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

Illumined with rays of never-waning light, O Romanus, thou didst quench the lofty flame, adorned with the gift of prophecy and numbered among the choirs of the martyrs, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!

A fragrant rose of tender growth, watered with his mother’s teachings and the blood of martyrdom, is incorruptibly offered to Christ as from a garden of many flowers.

*Theotokion:* O most hymned one who alone gavest birth to God without seed, lead us forth who have fallen into the abyss of sin, but hymn thee, saying: Blessed art Thou among women, O most immaculate Mistress.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst struggle in radiant feats, O most lauded one, and Christ bestowed upon thee much goodly fame of great splendor which endureth eternally, causing thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven who dost fervently chant: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Christ supremely forever!

As a most faithful supplicant, as a most fervent intercessor for us, we now set thee before the King of all, the Author of creation. Pray thou for us, interceding in thy martyr’s boldness in behalf of those who praise thee and chant with faith: Ye people, exalt Christ supremely forever!

Because of thine active faith thou wast vouchsafed to receive a kingship which cannot be taken away; for God, Who lieth not, promised to give it thee, and for Him thou didst commit thy body to fire and torture, crying aloud: Praise Him, ye priests! Supremely exalt Christ, ye people, forever!

*Theotokion:* In manner divine thou didst give birth to the Word of God, Who is equally without beginning and of equal honor with the Father, Who brought all things forth out of non-existence by the counsel of the Father, and became flesh for the sake of us men. Wherefore, acknowledging thee, in Orthodox fashion, to be the Theotokos, we exalt Christ supremely forever.

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast obedient to the words of Christ, O glorious one, laying down thy life for thy flock, being strangled in thy zeal for it, tortured, lacerated and wounded; and thou didst cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.

Truly thy mouth and tongue were full of joy and gladness, continually blessing God; for, cut out and dripping with blood, O Romanus, it setteth forth for us the law of faith, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the Word of the Father through the divine Spirit, thou didst remain a virgin, O Theotokos who knewest not man, transcending the laws of nature in thy birthgiving. Wherefore, rejoicing, we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Martyr Plato

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

O ye who love the martyrs, come, let us hymn the martyr, crowned by God, who extended the piety of his birth; for, as an offshoot of the branch of life, he bringeth forth fruit which exudeth the wine of compunction for us.

Precious in the sight of the Lord was the death of the martyr, for he is become the mediator of the true life which is everlasting and imperishable, and giveth rich recompense, the lot of incorruption and immortal glory.

All thy life thou didst consecrate to God Almighty, O martyr, and, rejoicing, thou didst offer thyself as a well-pleasing and living sacrifice. Wherefore, thou hast manifestly been vouchsafed sweetness which passeth understanding. Pray thou that those who hymn thee be delivered from temptations.

*Theotokion:* Save me, O Mother of God who gavest birth to Christ my Savior, Who is both God and man, in two natures, but not in two hypostases, the Only-begotten of the Father and of thee, the first-born of all creation. Wherefore, all of us magnify thee forever.

Canon of the Martyr Romanus

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

All thy trust didst thou place in the Master, O glorious martyr Romanus, enduring multifarious wounds; and thou hast received ineffable glory and divine delight.

Behold, instead of pain a torrent of sweetness hath been given thee, O martyr Romanus, who bearest a crown and wearest a robe dyed red in thy blood. Like a fragrant and never-fading rose thou wast slain as a child for Christ’s sake.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou hast delivered mortals from the primal curse of our ancestors, and hast opened the life of Eden unto us through thy birthgiving, which transcendeth nature. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary…”—

In thy ways thou didst tread the hard and divine path and didst ascend to the expanse of the kingdom of heaven, O Plato, glory of martyrs, shining with the light of the incorruptible Trinity. Wherefore, partaking of endless glory, be thou mindful of those who honor thee.

Theotokion—

O Virgin Theotokos, I produce thy protection as a truly invincible help and wall of defense, and thee as a mediator before God, that I may be delivered from everlasting torment, O Mistress, and through thee find a share in the kingdom, in life incorruptible.

