The 19th Day of the Month of November

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Obadiah

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr

Barlaam of Cæsarea in Cappadocia

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 6 stichera; 3 for the prophet, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “O all-praised martyrs...”—

As a splendid receptacle of the Spirit and one illumined by Him, O Obadiah of vision most divine, thou wast enriched by the image of prophecy, the foreknowledge of things to come, and the knowledge of the truth. Pray thou now, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Of the primary traits and essential proofs whereby God is depicted do the glorious and honorable prophets partake as a gift secondarily through communion and grace when the Lord illumineth His favored ones with His effulgence.

Full of never-waning light, beholding glory which transcendeth understanding and reason, and standing before the Master of all, thou wast a glorious prophet and a divine herald of God. Him do thou entreat, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

And 3 for the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs...”—

Firmer than a pillar, stronger than brass, and mightier than iron wast thou; for, when heated by fire, each of them doth disintegrate and is straightway destroyed, overcome by the force thereof; but thine unwavering right hand, outstretched over the burning coals, O most wise one, did triumph most gloriously.

As though thou wast a priest standing before God and coming before Him, not with another’s blood, but with thine own most of all, O blessed one, thou didst offer an incense of sweet savor with thy martyr’s hand, not to demonic illusions, but to Christ, the Savior and Master, Who reigneth forever.

A priest who offereth and a lamb which is offered: both do we joyously call thee, O most lauded one; for as both wast thou immolated in the fire of torment as an unblemished sacrifice to God. Him do thou entreat, that He save those who ever honor thy most glorious memory.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

With the showers of the all-holy Spirit bedew thou my mind, O all-pure one, who gavest birth unto Christ, the gentle Rain from heaven, Who, by His compassions, doth wash away the incalculably boundless iniquities of men; dry up the wellspring of my passions, and ever vouchsafe unto me a torrent of the sweetness of life by thy supplications.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

As she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, the ewe-lamb who gave birth to Thee lamented and maternally exclaimed to Thee: O my Son most desired, how is it that Thou art suspended upon the Tree of the Cross, O Long-suffering One? How is it, O Word, that Thy hands and feet have been nailed by the iniquitous? How hast thou shed Thy blood, O Master?

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

In his sufferings, O Lord, thy martyr Barlaam received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tormentors and set at naught the feeble audacity of the demons. By his prayers do Thou save our souls.

At Matins

One canon from the Octoechos, and two for the saints.

Ode I

Canon of the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the glory of the clairvoyant Obadiah,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone V—

*Irmos:* To God the Savior, Who led His people in the sea with dryshod feet and drowned Pharaoh and all his army, let us chant alone, for He is glorious.

Standing now as a prophet before God the Savior, entreat Him with boldness, that He enlighten with rays of light those who with faith call thee blessed, O divinely inspired one.

He who manifestly foreknoweth all things, beholding the untroubled and radiant purity of thy heart, O blessed one, appointed thee a God-pleasing prophet.

Truly beholding visions revealed to thee by God, thou didst proclaim the impiety and cruel perniciousness of thy brethren and their just destruction, O blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Saved by thy seedless birthgiving, O pure Theotokos, we beseech thee: from the temptations of the world do thou deliver us, who together give utterance unto a hymn of victory.

Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thy pangs of endurance, O Barlaam,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I shall sing to Thee, O Lord my God; for Thou didst lead Thy people forth from the bondage of Egypt, and didst overwhelm the chariots of Pharaoh and his might.

Rendered luminous by the splendors of thy contest, O Barlaam, by thy supplications do thou preserve us, who with faith honor thy memory.

With hymnody let the wondrous Barlaam be honored, who, with fame, quenched the fire of impiety with his divinely inspired fire of reverence for God.

Having contended for piety, O crown-bearer Barlaam, thou hast now been honored by the right hand of the Almighty with a crown of glory, as is meet.

The Master gave thee strength against divers wounds, O most blessed martyr; wherefore, thou didst vanquish the savagery of the godless.

*Theotokion:* The ladder of heaven, which Jacob, thine ancestor, foresaw of old, hast thou been shown to be, whereby the Word hath come down to us, O Virgin.

Ode III

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, establish Thou my mind, that I may hymn and glorify Thy saving ascension.

Thou wast the water of mystic rivers issuing forth from the abyss of the gifts of the Spirit, O herald of God.

Thou wast set forth by the will and providence of God to proclaim things to come, O right glorious one.

Illumined by divine and heavenly light, O most blessed one, thou didst proclaim the future salvation of the gentiles.

*Theotokion:* The Word made His abode within thee, O Virgin Mother, and by thy mediation He saveth those who know thee to be the Theotokos, O most immaculate one.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

The whole bond of thy body and the cohesion of thy members were broken; yet the strength of thy soul was preserved intact.

Mightily showing forth the endurance of youth, O most blessed one, thou didst right mightily endure the assault of those who lacerated thy sides.

Who can laud with praises the mighty, powerful and serene understanding of thy mind, as is meet, O most blessed one?

*Theotokion:* In the hypostatic Life which appeared unto men through thy womb, O all-pure Bride of God, hath the corruption of death been brought to an end.

Sessional hymn of the prophet, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior...”—

The great Obadiah, having acquired a mind luminous with divine splendor, giveth utterance through the Holy Spirit, proclaiming things to come. Honoring him today with pious mind, we celebrate his sacred memory which enlighteneth men’s hearts.

Glory..., Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up...”—

Let the glorious Barlaam, who quenched the flame of ungodliness and set the hearts of the faithful afire with the dew of the knowledge of God, now be faithfully honored with divine hymns; for he put to shame the deception of idolatry and, having taken the crown of victory, asketh remission of sins for all.

Now and ever..., Theotokion—

He Who sitteth on the throne of the cherubim and abideth in the bosom of the Father, sitteth in thy womb as upon a holy throne, O Mistress; for, truly incarnate, God hath reigned over all the nations. Him let us now hymn with understanding. Entreat Him, O Theotokos, that thy servants be saved.

Or this Stavrotheotokion—

Beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross, O Christ, Who wast begotten of the unoriginate Father, she who gave birth to Thee in the flesh in latter times cried aloud: “Woe is me, O most beloved Jesus! How is it that Thou, O my Son, Who art glorified by the angels as God, art crucified now by iniquitous men? I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* I heard report of the power of the Cross, that paradise hath been opened thereby, and I cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having first cleansed thy soul of the passions, receiving the grace of prophecy through the Holy Spirit, thou didst cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Illumined by the brilliance of the lightning of the Bestower of light, the prophet Obadiah hath enlightened us to cry to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Thou wast shown to be the escort of the Church, the Bride of Christ, O most blessed one, proclaiming that the Savior would come forth from Sion, to Whom we cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* In divine manner thou gavest birth, O pure one, unto the equally beginningless and eternal Word of the Father, to Whom we cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Proclaiming the coming of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, the prophet cried out with gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Spurning the foolish speech of the rhetors and accepting the true teaching of the apostles, O glorious one, thou wast a true witness.

Thou didst withstand the fire and torments even unto death for Christ, O patient-hearted one, chanting aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Constrained by the most powerful fervor, O most blessed one, thou didst trample deception underfoot with godly wisdom, chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* The Incorporeal One, incarnate of the Virgin, came to men on earth; wherefore, with faith we cry out: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon to the Prophet

*Irmos:* Rising at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! for Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Rising early unto the Lord, O most lauded one, from heaven thou didst receive the gift of the all-holy Spirit.

Having acquired the godly life of Him Who helped thee, thou wast counted worthy to behold Him Who is understood to be invisible.

Light shone upon thee, in that thou art a prophet, O most blessed one, and gladness was given thee as a bride.

*Theotokion:* The All-divine One, Who created all things by His will, was formed of thee after our kind, O all-pure one.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God, Who hast shone forth the light, hast illumined the morning, and made manifest the day!

Christ hath shown us a witness to His own sufferings, who crieth out: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God!

For thy great endurance is a reward given, and a wreath of victory woven for thee who criest: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God!

With the darts of thy words thou didst penetrate the hearts of the foe, crying: Glory to Thee! Glory to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God!

*Theotokion:* Understanding thee to be a holy mountain and the tabernacle of the Most High, O Virgin, we cry: Glory to thee, O Theotokos, our hope!

Ode VI

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The abyss engulfed me, and the sea monster became a tomb for me; yet I cried unto Thee Who lovest mankind, and Thy right hand saved me, O Lord.

By the power of the divine Spirit thou didst behold things to come, receiving images of divine revelations as in a mirror through the splendor of thy soul.

By thy supplications entreat the Lord, O most blessed prophet, asking that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto those who with faith keep thy memory.

Take pity on Thy servants and grant them forgiveness of transgressions, O Thou Who lovest mankind, Who hast Thy prophet entreating Thee, who proclaimed Thee beforehand to the world.

*Theotokion:* He Who upbeareth all things by His word and divine power is borne in thine embrace, O thou who knewest not wedlock. Him do thou now beseech, that our souls be saved.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Prefiguring Thy three-day burial, the Prophet Jonah, praying within the sea monster, cried out: Deliver me from corruption, O Jesus, King of hosts!

Let the faces of the demons be smitten with the martyr’s immolated right hand; let the hearts of the faithful leap up, and let the choirs of the incorporeal ones be radiantly glad!

The conquests and victories of thy good struggles and the athletic contests of those who watched are adorned, O chosen and radiant triumph of the firstborn.

Arise now, ye good artists! Adorn ye the image of the martyr with your goodly skills, manifestly depicting therein the Judge of the contest.

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thy birthgiving from the ancient curse and the bitter condemnation of death, our first mother rejoiceth in thee, O most lauded Mother of God.

Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared...”—

Thou wast shown to be most amazing in the fortitude whereby thou didst endure immolation, and didst offer thyself in sacrifice unto Christ as incense of sweet savor. Having received a crown of honor, O Barlaam, do thou ever pray for us, O athlete.

Ode VII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* Blessed is the God of our fathers, Who saved the children who chanted unto Him in the fiery furnace.

Truly supernatural is the glory of Thy prophets, O blessed God of our fathers!

Having been counted worthy to dwell with God, thou dost chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou revealest Thy divine grace in Thy prophets, O blessed God of our fathers.

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thy birthgiving, O all-pure Virgin, we chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O God of our fathers, let us not be put to shame, but grant that we may cry out to Thee with boldness: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

As an invincible martyr hast thou been counted worthy to cry aloud to Christ with the choirs of the martyrs: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

With radiant lamps thou didst enter into the divine bridal chamber, O great martyr, crying out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Having acquired a right hand stronger than fire, as an intercessor at the right hand of thy Master thou criest out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Delivered by thine all-pure birthgiving, we, the faithful, hymn thee, crying out unceasingly: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O all-pure one!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* The Son and God, Who was begotten of the Father before the ages, and in latter times became incarnate of the Virgin Mother, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Enlightened by God, the prophets proclaimed beforehand knowledge of things to come, crying aloud with divine wisdom: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Illumined with divine beams of light, thou didst enlighten those who were in darkness like a ray in the deep, O herald of God, crying: Ye priests, hymn; ye people exalt God supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast revealed Thyself as of one nature with us, O Thou Who art consubstantial with Thy Father in the divine Essence, having become incarnate of the Mother, who knew not man. Wherefore, we hymn Thee, O Christ, and bless Thee for all ages.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* All ye works of God and all creation, bless the Lord! Ye venerable and lowly of heart, hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst destroy all the armor of the enemy, O right glorious Barlaam, and didst utterly consume the deception of idolatry, crying out: Thee do we exalt supremely, O Christ, forever!

Adorned with magnificence, thou didst stand before Christ, O ever-memorable athlete, arrayed in fine linen empurpled with thy martyr’s blood and hymning the Master forever.

Enkindled with the fire of piety, thou didst utterly consume all the illusions of the demons as they were thorns, crying out: Thee do we exalt supremely, O Christ, forever!

*Theotokion:* They who with faith call thee blessed, O most immaculate one, are blessed by the Lord; for thou gavest birth unto the Master Who blesseth creation, Whom we exalt supremely, O pure one, for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Prophet

*Irmos:* With oneness of mind, we, the faithful, magnify thee, the Mother of God, who, in manner past understanding and recounting, ineffably gavest birth in time to the Timeless One.

Adorned with divine discourse and activity, and having taken wing in the Spirit, O wondrous prophet, thou wast vouchsafed to behold things to come.

O glorious one, who dwellest where the choirs of the prophets and the splendors of the saints are, entreat the Lord to save those who praise thee with faith.

Cleaving wholly unto God with fervor, thou didst converse in pure manner through divine revelations, wherein thou dost now delight, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, the candlestand of the Light and the tablet of grace, O pure one, and we magnify thee, who received the incarnate Word.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

The law of praise is overturned by the magnificence of thy struggles. Christ, the one Master, knoweth to glorify thee with divine radiance. Him do thou earnestly entreat in behalf of those who hymn thee.

Having brought thy whole self to the Lord as a living sacrifice, thou wast shown to be a fellow heir and sharer in His kingdom; and, rejoicing, thou now reignest with Him, O ever-memorable one.

The godly martyr, having arrayed himself against sword, fire and torments, shedding his blood for love of Thee, even unto death, O Savior Who lovest mankind, doth delight, receiving immortality from Thee.

*Theotokion:* Rejoicing, I set thee forth as the helper of the world, the Virgin Mother of God, the intercessor and salvation of all my life; for, having given birth unto God, thou art able to save those who hymn thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “When the disciples beheld...”—

Dance thou and join chorus, O prophet Obadiah, beholding the fulfillment of thy words. And, standing before the Trinity, remember those who do honor and keep thy splendid memory, O most blessed one.

Theotokion—

Seeing God the Word crucified, Who ineffably issued forth from thine all-pure womb, O Virgin Mother, thou didst cry out: Glory to Thine ineffable dispensation, O my Savior, whereby Thou savest Thy world!

