The 21st Day Of The Month Of November

The Entry Of Our All-Holy Mistress,

The Theotokos & Ever-Virgin Mary, Into The Temple

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Having received from the Lord the fruit of the promise, the Mother of God, the right-acceptable sacrifice, Joachim and Anna lead her into the temple today; and Zachariah, the great high priest, receiveth her with his blessing. *Twice*

The holy of holies is fittingly brought to dwell in the sanctuary as a sacrifice pleasing to God; and virgins, well adorned with the virtues, bearing candles before her, escort her to the Lord, as a most hallowed vessel.

Let the portal of the God-receiving temple be opened! For today the temple and throne of the King of all is received therein with glory! Joachim bringeth her forth, dedicating to the Lord her who was chosen by Him to be His Mother.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VIII—

David foretold thee, O all-pure one, foreseeing the sanctification of thine entry into the Temple. Therein do the ends of the earth, holding festival today, glorify thee, O all-hymned one. For, O Mother of the Word of life, who before giving birth wast Virgin and after giving birth remained incorrupt, today Zachariah maketh merry in the Temple, accepting thee, O Mistress; and the Holy of Holies rejoiceth, receiving thee, the wellspring of our life. Wherefore, we also cry out in psalms to thee: Beseech thy Son and our God in our behalf, that He grant us great mercy.

On the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

O ye heavenly gates, accept ye into the Holy of holies the Virgin, the undefiled tabernacle of God Almighty.

*Stichos:* The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, those near her shall be brought unto Thee.

O ye choirs of virgins, receive into the Holy of holies the pure Virgin as the Bride of God, the King of all, splendidly bearing candles.

*Stichos:* They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, they shall be brought into the temple of the King.

The bridal-chamber of God the Word receiveth noetic bread from the hands of the divine angel, while making her habitation in the Holy of holies.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same melody—

The thrice-radiant Light enkindling thee, O Theotokos, in the temple of glory, sendeth thee heavenly food, magnifying thee.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Today is the prelude of God’s good will and the proclamation of the salvation of men. The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God and proclaimeth Christ unto all. To her let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the Creator’s dispensation!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, 4 in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous marvel…”—

Let us join chorus today, O ye faithful, chanting to the Lord in psalms and hymns, and honoring His sacred tabernacle, the animate ark, who contained the uncontainable Word; for she is brought to the Lord, having become a babe in manner transcending nature. And Zachariah, the great high priest, receiveth her with gladness as the dwelling-place of God. *Twice*

Today the animate temple of the holy glory of Christ our God, the pure one who alone among women is blessed, is led into the temple of the law, to dwell in the Holy of holies; with her Joachim and Anna rejoice in spirit, and choirs of virgins sing to the Lord, chanting in psalms and honoring His Mother.

Thou art the proclamation of the prophets, the glory of the apostles, the boast of the martyrs, the restoration of all mortals, O Virgin Mother of God; for through thee have we been reconciled with God. Wherefore, we honor thine entrance into the temple of the Lord, and with the angel all of us who find salvation through thy supplications cry out to thee in hymns: Rejoice, O all-pure one!

And 4 stichera in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Into the Holy of holies is the holy and immaculate one led by the Holy Spirit; and she is fed by a holy angel, in that she is the most holy temple of our holy God, Who hath sanctified all things by her entry and hath deified the nature of mortal men which had fallen. *Twice*

Rejoicing today and bearing candles, the maidens precede the noetic lamp and escort her with sanctity to the Holy of holies, revealing beforehand the Effulgence which would ineffably shine forth from her to illumine with the Spirit those who sit in darkness of ignorance.

The most lauded Anna cried out: “O Zachariah, in gladness receive her whom the prophets of God proclaimed in the Spirit, and escort her to the holy temple, there to be raised in sanctity, that she may become the divine throne, the palace and bower, and the radiant abode of the Master of all!”

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone VIII—

After thy nativity, O Mistress, Bride of God, thou didst go to the Temple of the Lord to be raised in the Holy of Holies as a consecrated maiden. Then was Gabriel sent to thee, the all-immaculate one, bringing food unto thee. All of the heavenly powers marvelled, beholding the Holy Spirit abiding within thee. Wherefore, O all-pure and undefiled Mother of God, who art glorified in heaven and on earth, save thou thy race.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. 3 Readings:

A Reading from Exodus

The Lord spake to Moses, saying: “On the first day of the first month, at the new moon, thou shalt set up the tabernacle of the witness, and thou shalt place therein the ark of the testimony, and shalt cover the ark with the veil. And thou shalt bring in the table and the candlestick; and thou shalt place the golden censer, to burn incense before the ark of the testimony; and thou shalt put a covering of a veil on the doors of the tabernacle of witness. And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and shalt anoint the tabernacle, and all things therein; and shalt sanctify it, and all its furniture, and it shall be holy. And thou shalt hallow the altar, and the altar shall be most holy. And Moses did all things soever the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, commanded him. And a cloud covered the tabernacle of witness, and the tabernacle was filled with the glory of the Lord. And Moses was not able to enter into the tabernacle of testimony, because the cloud overshadowed it, and the tabernacle was filled with the glory of the Lord.

A Reading from the Third Book of Kings

It came to pass that Solomon finished building the house of the Lord. And he assembled all the elders of Israel in Sion, to bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Sion. And the priests took up the ark, and the tabernacle of testimony, and all the holy vessels which were in the tabernacle of testimony. And the king and all Israel stood before the ark. And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord into its place, into the oracle of the house, even into the Holy of holies, under the wings of the cherubim. For the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark; and the cherubim covered the ark and its holy things above. There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant which Moses put there in Horeb, which the Lord made. And it came to pass when the priests departed out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house. And the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of the Lord God Almighty filled the house.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Ezekiel

Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord.” Then He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the Prince, he shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in by way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, behold, the house was full of the glory of the Lord.

At Litia, these stichera, he composition of George of Nicomedia,—

*In Tone I:* Let heaven rejoice today from on high, and let the clouds drop down gladness at the exceeding all-glorious mighty works of our God! For, lo! the portal which faceth east, who was born of a barren woman according to God’s promise, and became a dwelling-place sanctified for God, is brought forth as an unblemished offering. Let David rejoice, striking his harp! For he said: “The virgins that follow after her shall be brought before the King; those near her shall be brought unto the tabernacle of God, into His sanctuary, to be reared in the dwelling-place of Him Who, for the salvation of our souls, was incorruptibly begotten of the Father before time.”

*In Tone IV:* Today the Theotokos, the temple which held God, is escorted into the temple of the Lord; and Zachariah receiveth her. Today the Holy of holies rejoiceth and the choir of angels mystically keepeth festival. And we, celebrating with them today, cry aloud with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee, Who hath great mercy!

Come, all ye faithful, let us praise her who alone is immaculate, who was proclaimed beforehand by the prophets, and is brought into the temple, the Mother chosen before time began, the Theotokos who hath appeared in latter days. O Lord, through her supplications grant us Thy peace and great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Leo Magister, in Tone V—

The day of joy and the most honored feast hath shone forth! For today she who remained Virgin after giving birth, as she was before birthgiving, is led into the temple of the Lord, and the elder Zachariah, the father of the Forerunner, rejoiceth and crieth out in gladness: “The intercessor for the sorrowful draweth nigh unto the holy temple, in that she is holy, to be hallowed in the habitation of the King of all! Let Joachim, her forebear, be glad, and let Anna rejoice! For they have offered unto God the unblemished Mistress like a heifer three years of age. Rejoice, ye mothers! Leap up, O virgins! Ye barren women, join chorus! For the Queen of all, who hath been foretold, hath opened unto us the kingdom of heaven! Rejoice, ye people, and be glad!”

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O Life-bearing Tree…”—

Rejoice, O heaven and earth, beholding the only immaculate Virgin, the noetic heaven, coming forth to be raised in honor in the house of God! To her did Zachariah cry out, marvelling: “O portal of the Lord, I open unto thee the gates of the temple! Rejoice therein, joining chorus! For I have come to know and believe that the deliverance of Israel is manifestly coming, and that God the Word will be born of thee, granting the world great mercy!”

*Stichos:* The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, those near her shall be brought unto Thee.

O grace divinely manifest! With gladness Anna leadeth to the temple of God the pure Ever-virgin given her by grace, and she calleth maidens to go before her, bearing lamps and saying: “Go forth, my child! Be thou an offering and incense of sweet savor unto Him Who gave thee to us! Enter into the impassable precincts and learn the mysteries! And prepare thyself to be the gladsome and beauteous dwelling-place of Jesus, Who bestoweth upon the world great mercy!”

*Stichos:* They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, they shall be brought into the temple of the King.

The most holy Virgin, the temple wherein God dwelleth, is borne into the temple of God, and maidens bearing lamps now precede her. Joachim and Anna, the excellent couple, her parents, leap for joy, dancing, for they gave birth to her who gave birth to the Creator, who, dancing in the divine tabernacles and fed by the hand of an angel, hath been shown to be the most immaculate Mother of Christ, Who bestoweth great mercy upon the world.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Sergius of Jerusalem, in Tone VI—

Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple of the Lord, who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye in advance, doing homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, for she ever prayeth for our souls.

At the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion, in Tone IV—

Today is the prelude of God’s good will and the proclamation of the salvation of men. The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God and proclaimeth Christ unto all. To her let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the Creator’s dispensation! *Thrice*

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels…”—

The fruit of the righteous Joachim and Anna is offered to God in the holy sanctuary, the nourisher of our Life who became a babe in the flesh, whom the sacred Zachariah blessed. With faith let us all bless her as the Mother of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Even before thy conception thou wast consecrated to God, O pure one, and, having been born on earth, thou hast now been offered to Him as a gift, fulfilling thy parents’ vow; and having been presented in the divine temple, accompanied as a babe by lighted lamps in purity, thou hast been shown to be the receptacle of the unapproachable and divine light, as the temple of God. Truly great is thy going forth, O only Ever-virgin Bride of God!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O all-holy Virgin, divinely chosen Maiden, and we honor thine entry into the temple of the Lord.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in His holy mountain. \[Ps. 47: 2\]

B In the well-rooted joy of all the earth. \[Ps. 47: 2\]

A Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. \[Ps. 86: 3\]

B The city of the great King. \[Ps. 47: 3\]

A Even as we have heard, so too we have seen. \[Ps. 47: 9\]

B In the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God. \[Ps. 47: 9\]

A God hath laid her foundations unto eternity. \[Ps. 47: 9\]

B The Most High hath hallowed His tabernacle. \[Ps. 45: 5\]

A Holiness and majesty are in His sanctuary. \[Ps. 95: 6\]

B Holy is Thy temple, wondrous in righteousness. \[Ps. 64: 5, 6\]

A This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter in thereat. \[Ps. 117: 20\]

B At Thy right hand stood the Queen. \[Ps. 44: 10\]

A Arrayed in a vesture of inwoven gold, adorned in varied colors. \[Ps. 44: 10\]

B The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance. \[Ps. 44: 13\]

A They the daughters of kings in Thine honor. \[Ps. 44: 10\]

B All the glory of the daughter of the King is within. \[Ps. 44: 14\]

A With gold-fringed garments is she arrayed, adorned in varied colors. \[Ps. 44: 14\]

B The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King. \[Ps. 44: 15\]

A Those near her shall be brought unto Thee. \[Ps. 44: 15\]

B They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, they shall be brought into the temple of the King. \[Ps. 44: 16\]

A Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear. \[Ps. 44: 11\]

B And forget thine own people and thy father’s house. \[Ps. 44: 11\]

A And the King shall greatly desire thy beauty. \[Ps. 44: 12\]

B I shall commemorate thy name in every generation and generation. \[Ps. 44: 18\]

A We have thought, O God, of Thy mercy in the midst of Thy people. \[Ps. 47: 10\]

B Therefore shall peoples give praise unto thee forever, and unto the ages of ages. \[Ps. 44: 18\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Let David the psalmist rejoice, and let Joachim and Anna join chorus, for the radiant Mary, the divine lamp, issued forth from them as a holy fruit, and she rejoiceth, entering the temple. Beholding her, the son of Barachiah blessed her, and, rejoicing, cried out: “Rejoice, O wonder of the universe!” *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

*Stichos:* My heart hath poured forth a good word; I shall speak of my works to the king.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

The Gospel According to Luke §4 \(1:39-49, 56\)

In those days Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah; and entered into the house of Zachariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud voice, and said: “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she who believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.” And Mary said: “My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. For He Who is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is His name.” And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

After Psalm 50, instead of “Through the prayers of the Theotokos…”, we chant:

*Glory…:* Today the animate temple of the great King entereth the temple to prepare herself as a divine dwelling-place for Him. Be glad, O ye people!

Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

And after Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone IV—

Today the Theotokos, the temple who contained God, was led into the temple of the Lord, and Zachariah received her. Today the Holy of holies rejoiceth, and the choir of angels keepeth mystic festival. And with them we also, celebrating today, cry out with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee, Who hath great mercy!

Two canons of the Theotokos: the first with 8, the irmos being chanted twice, followed by 6 troparia; and the second like the first, with 8, the irmos being chanted twice, followed by 6 troparia.

Ode I

Canon I of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “O Mistress, grant me the grace of discourse”, the composition of George, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her Entry.

O all-pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing fountain of grace; and we pray thee: Rain down drops of knowledge upon us, that we may praise thee forever.

Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O all-pure one, thou wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His advent.

Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled them to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!

The glorious portal which thoughts cannot pass, having opened the doors of the Temple of God, doth now command us that have assembled to delight in her divine wonders.

Canon II of the Theotokos, the composition of Basil, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Let us hasten today, honoring the Theotokos with hymns, and let us celebrate a spiritual feast; for she is offered to God in the temple as a gift.

With songs let us hymn the glorious arrival of the Theotokos; for today, as the prophets foretold, she is borne into the temple as a gift of great price, though she is herself the temple of God.

The blameless Anna rejoiced, maternally bringing a gift of great price to God in the temple; and with her Joachim keepeth splendid festival.

Of old, David, thine ancestor, hymned thee, O Virgin Bride of God, calling thee the daughter of Christ the King; and, having given birth to Him, as a Mother thou didst feed Him with milk as a babe.

Three years of age in the flesh, the Theotokos is borne unto the Lord; and, receiving her, Zachariah the priest of God hath installed her in the temple, rejoicing.

Ye candle-bearing virgins, join chorus! O ye mothers, do ye likewise today! Chant ye unto the Queen and Mother who cometh to the temple of Christ the King!

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* O Trinity One in essence *—* Father, Word and Holy Spirit: Thee do we glorify with faith as the Creator of all, and unto Thee do we piously cry aloud: Save us, O God!

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Arrayed in purple vesture dyed in thy blood, O all-pure one, God the King, issuing forth, hath restored the whole human race in His compassion.

*Katavasia:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

Canon I

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth today appear as that which adorneth the bride for her wedding.

David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, and declareth thee, O all-pure one, the queen adorned, who standeth in the Temple before our King and God, O most pure one.

From her, from whom transgressions went forth among the human race, hath her correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into the house of God.

The angelic armies and a multitude of all men leap for joy, and they advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the house of God.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us keep festival and rejoice together in spirit, revelling today on the holy feast of the daughter of the King, the Mother of our God.

Rejoice today, O Joachim! Be thou glad in spirit, O Anna, leading to the Lord the three-year old child born of thee, as though she were a pure and most immaculate heifer.

Mary, the Theotokos, the habitation of God, is led into the holy temple, being three years of age in the flesh; and, going before her, virgins bear lighted lamps.

The pure ewe-lamb of God, the undefiled turtle-dove, the tabernacle containing God, the sanctuary of glory, hath chosen to dwell within the holy tabernacle.

With hymns let the Bride of God be praised, who is more spacious than the heavens and more exalted than the heavenly hosts, and who, though but three years in the flesh, is yet mature in spirit.

Celebrating the arrival of the Theotokos in the precincts which cannot be entered, joyously bearing candles noetically today, let us draw nigh unto the temple with the virgins.

Ye priests of God, clothe yourselves in righteousness through grace and go forth in splendor to greet the daughter of God the King, granting her entry into the Holy of holies.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* The Father is light; His Son is light; and the comforting Spirit is also light: for the Trinity, shining forth as from a single sun, doth divinely illumine and preserve our souls.

*Now & ever…:* O pure one, the prophets proclaimed thee as the ark of the sanctuary, the gold censer, the lampstand and table; and we hymn thee as the tabernacle which held God.

*Katavasia:* To Christ God, the Son Who was begotten of the Father without corruption before time began, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Tell us, O David: what is this present festival? Who is she whom thou once didst hymn in the Book of Psalms as daughter, divine Maiden and Virgin? “The virgins that follow after her, together with those near her,” said he, “shall be mystically brought unto the King.” Make this a wondrous and universal feast for those who cry: The Theotokos is come unto us, the mediatress of salvation!

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same tone & melody—

With gladness Mary, the Theotokos, is all-gloriously brought into the house of God: the unblemished ewe-lamb, the undefiled bridal-chamber, whom the angels of God escort with faith and all the faithful ever call blessed and hymn her unceasingly with a loud voice in thanksgiving: Thou art our glory and salvation, O most immaculate one!

Ode IV

Canon I

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God—the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin—the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to those who are on earth!

The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.

All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvellous; for the Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God’s dispensation.

Revealed as temple and palace and animate heaven, O divine bride of the King, thou art brought today to the Temple of the Law to be kept for Him, O all-pure one.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Prophet Isaiah, prophesy unto us: Who is the Virgin who will conceive in her womb, who, springing forth from the root of Judah, shall give birth to the right glorious Fruit of the holy seed of King David?

O virgins, commence ye to chant hymns, holding candles in your hands, and praising the arrival of the pure Theotokos who now cometh to the temple of God, and celebrating with us!

Rejoice now, O Joachim and Anna, leading into the temple of the Lord, like a heifer three years of age, the pure one born of you, who will become the Mother of God.

As the holy of holies, O pure one, thou didst love to dwell in the holy temple, and thou dost remain, conversing all-gloriously with the angels, receiving bread from heaven, O Virgin, thou nourisher of Life.

Having given birth beyond hope to the all-pure Virgin, Joachim and Anna piously vowed to offer her unto God; and they fulfill their oath, giving up to the house of God as a sacrifice her who was born of them.

The rod of Aaron once budded forth, prefiguring the divine birthgiving, O pure one: for thou dost conceive without seed and hast remained incorrupt; and even after giving birth thou art shown to be a virgin, nurturing the God of all as an infant.

Ye virgins and mothers, haste ye together with us to honor the Virgin and Mother who hath been born; and let us all splendidly celebrate her as an unblemished sacrifice brought forth as fruitful for God.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* Let us piously glorify the true God, the Trinity of Persons, the Unity in image, Whom the ranks of angels and archangels hymn as the Master of creation, and whom men ever worship with faith.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* O all-pure and pure one, unceasingly entreat thy Son and God to Whom thou gavest birth in the flesh, that He deliver all thy servants from the multifarious snares of the devil and from every assailing temptation.

*Katavasia:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon I

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The all-pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King of all, as He Himself doth know.

Zachariah, beholding once the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.

O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy growth; strange also, most glorious and unutterable by men, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.

A most radiant lamp, O Bride of God, thou hast shone forth today in the house of the Lord and dost illumine us with the precious gifts of thy wonders, O pure and all-hymned Theotokos.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light upon us who rise early unto the judgments of Thy commandments, O Master Christ our God, Who lovest mankind.

O all ye Orthodox, let us take up lamps, hastening to glorify the Mother of God, for she is led to the Lord today as a right acceptable sacrifice.

Let thine ancestors be glad today, O Mistress; and let her who gave thee birth rejoice with thy father, for their fruit is offered to the Lord.

Celebrating with faith, let us all hymn the unblemished heifer, most glorious and of great renown, for she gave birth to the divine Bullock in the flesh.

The divine tokens of thy betrothal, of thy birthgiving which passeth understanding, O pure Virgin, are recorded today by the Holy Spirit in the house of God.

Let the outer doors of the glory of our God be opened, and let them receive as an unblemished heifer of three years the Mother of God, who will not taste of wedlock.

Let us hymn the Ever-virgin who hath become the Mother of God, the most honorable mountain overshadowed; for she hath shone forth light upon the ends of the earth.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* Glorifying the one all-originating and ever-existing Godhead, we worship the indivisible Essence in three Persons, equal in honor and glory.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Ever delivered from misfortunes and tribulations, O Theotokos, we have acquired thy prayer as a right tranquil haven and an invincible bulwark amid evil circumstances.

*Katavasia:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Ode VI

Canon I

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Thou Who hast upheld all things by Thy word hast hearkened to the prayer of the righteous ones. Wherefore, Thou hast loosed the infirmity of the barren woman, in that Thou art compassionate, and hast given them her who is the cause of joy.

Desiring to make His salvation known to the gentiles, the Lord hath now taken from among men her who hath not known wedlock, as a sign of reconciliation and renewal.

As a house of grace, wherein treasures of the ineffable dispensation of God are laid up, O most pure one, thou didst share in unfading delight in the Temple.

Receiving thee as a royal diadem, O Bride of God, the Temple hath been made splendid and hath mounted to higher things, beholding in thee the fulfillment of the prophecies.

Canon II

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

O ye faithful, let us celebrate the spiritual feast of the Mother of God, chanting piously; for she is more holy than the heavenly intelligences.

With spiritual hymns let us praise the Mother of the Light, O ye faithful, for she hath appeared to us today, going forth into the temple of God.

The unblemished ewe-lamb, the pure turtle-dove, is brought to dwell in the house of God, for, as immaculate, she was chosen beforehand to be the Mother of God.

The temple of God, the heavenly tabernacle, maketh entry into the temple of the law, and from her hath the Light shone forth upon us who are in darkness.

A child in the flesh, though perfect in soul, the holy ark entereth the house of God, to be nurtured with grace divine.

By thine entreaties free us who have recourse unto thee, from all temptations and spiritual misfortunes, O Mother of Christ God.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* O Father, Son and upright Spirit, Unity in three Hypostases, indivisible Trinity: have mercy upon those who worship Thy divine might.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Contained in thy womb, O all-pure Mother of God, He Whom nought could contain issued forth from thee in two natures: God and man.

*Katavasia:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

The most pure temple of the Savior, the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, the sacred treasury of the glory of God, is on this day brought into the house of the Lord, bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. To her do the angels of God chant the hymn: She is the heavenly tabernacle!

*Ikos:* Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be above all creation, visible and noetic? Wherefore, desiring to praise her, I am greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, making bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is the heavenly tabernacle!

Ode VII

Canon I

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Lo, today a joyous spring hath burst forth upon the ends of the earth, enlightening our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us mystically hold feast this day!

Let all things—heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitude of men—bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry out: Our joy and deliverance is brought to the Temple!

The Scriptures have come to pass, the Law hath faded like a shadow, and rays of grace have shone forth upon thee who hast entered into the Temple of God, O pure Virgin Mother, wherein thou art blessed.

Heaven and earth and the netherworld are subject to thine Offspring as Creator and God, O most pure one, and every nation of mortals doth confess that the Lord and Savior of our souls hath appeared.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The furnace was bedewed, O Savior, and the children, dancing, chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us join chorus and hymn the pure Mistress, honoring Joachim and Anna as is meet.

Prophesy, O David, giving utterance in the Spirit: The virgins that follow after thee shall be brought to thee into the temple of the Queen and Mother.

The ranks of the angels rejoiced and the souls of the righteous were gladdened, for the Mother of God is led into the Holy of holies.

Receiving heavenly food, she who was to become the Mother of Christ God in the flesh excelled in wisdom and grace.

Abiding in the temple of God as a most sacred vessel, the immaculate Mary rejoiced in body and spirit.

Thy chaste parents brought thee to the innermost chamber of the temple, O all-pure one, to be raised as the dwelling-place of Christ God in strange manner.

*Glory…:* *Triadicon:* We glorify the indivisible Trinity, and we hymn the one Divinity: the Father, the Word and the most Holy Spirit.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* The Lord to Whom thou gavest birth, do thou entreat, in that He is compassionate by nature, O Theotokos, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.

*Katavasia:* The children raised together in piety, disdaining the ungodly command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon I

*Irmos:* Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden! Let Gabriel give utterance unto the true and ancient counsel of the Most High: “Make ready to receive God, for through thee hath the Infinite One come to dwell with men!” Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Anna, once, leading the all-pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marvelling, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The handmaid of God have I been, answered Anna unto him, and I call upon Him with faith and prayer to accept the fruit of my birth-pangs, that, having received this child, I might bring her who was born unto Him Who bestowed her. Wherefore, I cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Truly this is a matter of the Law, the priest said to her, and strange doth this thing seem unto me, beholding her who doth most gloriously surpass the holy ones in grace led into the house of God. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Canon II

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Joachim rejoiceth today in splendor, and the blameless Anna offereth to the Lord God a sacrifice: the holy daughter given her according to God’s promise.

The holy David and Jesse render praise, and Judah offereth homage; for the pure Virgin, of whom the preëternal God was born, grew forth as fruit from their root.

The all-pure Mary, the animate tabernacle, is brought today into the house of God; and Zachariah taketh her in his arms as the sanctified treasure of the Lord.

O ye faithful, let us truly honor the Virgin Mother of God, who is blessed by the hands of the priests, as the portal of salvation, the noetic mountain and the animate ladder.

O ye prophets, apostles and martyrs of Christ, ye ranks of angels, and all ye mortals, with hymns let us honor the pure Virgin as the blessed Mother of the Most High.

O pure and most immaculate one, they who divinely gave thee birth have brought thee to the temple as a pure sacrifice; and thou dost strangely abide in the impassable precincts of God, to be prepared as the dwelling-place of the Word.

We bless the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit: the Lord.

*Triadicon:* Let the Thrice-holy One be hymned: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Unity, the one Godhead, Who holdeth all creation in His hand for all ages!

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* The Word Who is without beginning receiveth a beginning in the flesh, being born of the Virgin Maiden as was His good pleasure: both God and man, restoring us who before were fallen, in His extreme loving-kindness.

*Katavasia:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

At Ode IX we do not chant the Magnificat, but sing instead the refrains of the feast:

The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.

The irmos of Canon I is then chanted: “May the hands of the profane in nowise touch…”, whereupon the second choir chanteth the same refrain and irmos. A refrain is also chanted before each troparion of the ode, alternating between both choirs.

Ode IX

Canon I

*Irmos:* May the hands of the profane in nowise touch the Theotokos, the animate ark of God; but let the lips of the faithful, unceasingly chanting the cry of the angel, joyfully cry out: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed at how she entered into the Holy of holies with glory.

O pure Theotokos, as thou hast the most radiant beauty of purity of soul and art full of the grace of God from heaven, with the eternal light thou dost ever enlighten those who cry out with joy: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* The angels, beholding the entry of the Virgin, were amazed at how she entered into the Holy of holies all-gloriously.

Thy wonder doth surpass the power of words, O pure Theotokos, for in thee I perceive a body impervious to the movement of sin. Wherefore, thankfully I cry out to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* The angels and we men honor the entry of the Virgin: how she entered the Holy of holies with glory.

Most gloriously did the Law prefigure thee, O pure one, as the tabernacle, the divine jar, the awesome ark, the veil, the staff, the inviolable temple and portal of God. Wherefore, all these things teach us to cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* The angels, beholding the entry of the Virgin, were amazed to see her enter the Holy of holies in God-pleasing manner.

In hymnody David cried out to thee prophetically, calling thee the daughter of the King in the comeliness of thy virtues, beholding thee standing, elaborately adorned, at the right hand of God. Wherefore, in prophecy he cried out: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* O ye angels, leap up with the saints! Ye virgins, dance together! For the divine Maiden hath entered into the Holy of holies!

Foreseeing thee who art pleasing to God, Solomon proclaimed thee to be the bower of the King, the living and sealed fountain, from whence untroubled waters have issued forth for us who cry out with faith: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

*Refrain:* O ye angels and men, let us magnify the Virgin with hymns; for in godly manner she hath entered the Holy of holies.

O Theotokos, thou givest to my soul the tranquility of thy gifts, pouring forth life upon those who honor thee as is meet, defending, protecting and preserving them thyself, that they might cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!

Then the first choir chanteth the refrain of Canon II of the feast:

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul, her who was led into the temple of the Lord and blessed by the hands of the priest.

Then the irmos is chanted: “The radiant cloud…” The second choir then chanteth the same refrain and irmos of the feast. And before each troparion of the canon we chant the above festal refrain.

Canon II

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

The divine maiden Mary, the fruit of the promise, issued forth from the righteous Joachim and Anna, and, a babe in the flesh, she is brought into the holy sanctuary like pleasing incense, to dwell in the Holy of holies.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

With hymns let us praise her who was a babe by nature and was supernaturally revealed as the Mother of God; for she is led unto the Lord in the temple of the law, as the fragrance of sweet savor for the righteous, as the spiritual fruit of her righteous parents.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

O ye faithful, with the angel let us as is meet cry out to the Theotokos “Rejoice!” Rejoice, O most comely Bride! Rejoice, O radiant cloud, from whom the Lord hath shone forth upon us who sit in the darkness of ignorance! Rejoice, thou hope of all!

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

O pure Mary Mother of God, thou Holy of holies, from the snares of the enemy and from all heresy and tribulation do thou free us by thy supplications, who bow down with faith before the image of thy holy countenance.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

With the Angel Gabriel all creation uttereth a fitting hymn to the Theotokos, crying: Rejoice, O most immaculate Mother of God, by whom we have been delivered from the primal curse, coming to share in incorruption!

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul…

O Virgin, thou hast been shown to be greater than the cherubim, more exalted than the seraphim and more spacious than the heavens, for thou didst contain within thy womb our God Whom nought can contain, and gavest birth to Him ineffably. Him do thou earnestly beseech in our behalf.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul, the dominion of the indivisible Godhead in three Hypostases.

*Triadicon:* Let us glorify the indivisible Trinity, the Essence in three Hypostases, the undivided glory, Who, in a single Godhead, is unceasingly hymned in heaven and on earth, piously worshipping the Father, the Son and the Spirit.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul, the all-pure Theotokos, who is more honorable and more ­glorious than the armies on high.

O Virgin Theotokos, pray thou, that we who flee with faith beneath thy compassion and piously worship thy Son as God and Lord of the world be delivered from corruption, misfortunes and all manner of temptations.

Then both choirs, descending together, chant the refrain of Canon I, followed by the katavasia:

The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.

A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, Whom praising, we magnify.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

With faith let us praise the divine Maiden Mary, whom the company of the prophets of old proclaimed to be the jar, the staff, the tablet and the unquarried mountain; for she is led today into the Holy of holies to be raised for the Lord. *Thrice*

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Virgins bearing lamps, escorting the Ever-virgin with splendor, truly prophesy the future in the Spirit; for the Theotokos, as the temple of God, is led as a child with virginal glory into the temple.

Truly the Theotokos hath appeared to the world as the right glorious fruit of a holy promise, for she surpasseth all. Piously led into the temple of God, she fulfilleth the supplication of her parents, and is preserved by the divine Spirit.

Faithfully nurtured on heavenly bread, O Virgin, in the temple of the Lord, thou hast given birth to the Word, the Bread of life, for the world, to Whom thou wast mystically promised beforehand by the Spirit as the chosen and most immaculate temple, betrothed to God the Father.

Let the portal of the God-receiving temple be opened! For today the temple and throne of the King of all is received therein with glory! Joachim bringeth her forth, dedicating to the Lord her who was chosen by Him to be His Mother.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the composition of Leo Magister, in Tone II—

Today the most immaculate Virgin is brought to the temple, to the habitation of God, the King of all, the Nourisher of our whole life. Today the most pure and holy one, is led to the Holy of holies like a heifer three years of age. Let us cry out unto her like the angel: “Rejoice, thou who alone art blessed among women!”

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I, and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.

After the entrance, the troparion of the feast; Glory…, Now & ever…: the kontakion of the feast.

Prokimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos—

My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.

*Stichos:* For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 320 \[Heb. 9: 1-7\]

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Alleluia, in Tone VIII—

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

Gospel according to Luke, §54 \[Lk. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28\]

At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha received Him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said: “Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me” And Jesus answered and said unto her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.” And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him: “Blessed is the womb that bore Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked.” But He said: “Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.”

Communion Verse—

I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

