The 23rd Day of the Month of November

Afterfeast of the Entry of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple

Commemoration of the Holy Hierarch and Wonderworker Metrophanes \(in Schema Macarius\), First Bishop of Voronezh

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 4 stichera, in Tone I—

Come, ye children of the Russian Orthodox Church, let us bless Metrophanes, the holy hierarch of Christ, who, having been faithful in a little, hath been set over many by the Master of the house of heaven, that he might pray unceasingly for those who with faith honor his ever-glorious memory. *Twice*

In thee do we rejoice, as is meet, O holy hierarch of Christ; and in the incorruption of thy relics do we boast; for, pouring forth streams of healing from thy tomb like water, thou dost bestow peace and blessing upon those who have recourse to thee, as an intercessor of heavenly glory who hath great grace with Christ our God.

Having lived angelically upon the earth, thou wast vouchsafed to live in heaven; and looking down upon thy homeland from on high, thou sendest down gifts of grace upon those who with faith and love keep thy most glorious memory, healing ailments of soul and body by thy prayers.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Joining chorus with hymns and songs in thy most honored memory, we glorify the Master and Lord of all in godly manner, Who, for the fruitful activity of thy soul, hath from on high given thee the fruitful grace of working wonders, O most blessed Metrophanes. Pray thou that our souls be delivered from misfortune.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone —

Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple of the Lord, who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye in advance, doing homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, for she ever prayeth for our souls.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V—

Having the law of Christ as a lamp unto thy feet, and walking and teaching in the light of His divine commandments without stumbling, thou wast a dwelling place of the all-holy Trinity, O most wise Metrophanes; whence also thou hast been revealed to us by God as a strong defender, driving away evil spirits with the power of the Holy Spirit.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

The faithful of the persecuted Russian Church, in the homeland and in the diaspora, do thou most gloriously establish in peace, and in our days grant immutable contentment; to the sacred council of hierarchs and to thy successors in thy see send down the aid of thy prayers, O Metrophanes, for the comely adornment of the churches of God, asking that we all be granted remission of sins and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Look upon the glorification of us who hymn thee, and accept our earnest prayers, O Metrophanes, and bear them to the throne of the Almighty, which is above the heavens, that by thy continued intercession He may save our souls.

Glory..., Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone —

The day of joy and the most honored feast hath shone forth! For today she who remained Virgin after giving birth, as she was before birthgiving, is led into the temple of the Lord, and the elder Zachariah, the father of the Forerunner, rejoiceth and crieth out in gladness: “The intercessor for the sorrowful draweth nigh unto the holy temple, in that she is holy, to be hallowed in the habitation of the King of all! Let Joachim, her forebear, be glad, and let Anna rejoice! For they have offered unto God the unblemished Mistress like a heifer three years of age. Rejoice, ye mothers! Leap up, O virgins! Ye barren women, join chorus! For the Queen of all, who hath been foretold, hath opened unto us the kingdom of heaven! Rejoice, ye people, and be glad!”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

A rule of faith and model of meekness wast thou to thy flock, O father Metrophanes, humble of mind; wherefore, thou didst shine forth in holy splendor more brightly than the sun, adorned with a crown of incorruption and glory. Beseech thou Christ God, that He save the suffering Russian land and thy city in peace.

Glory..., Now and ever..., that of the feast, in the same tone —

Today is the prelude of God’s good will and the proclamation of the salvation of men. The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God and proclaimeth Christ unto all. To her let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the Creator’s dispensation!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Let the virgins be brought to the King in the temple of the Lord, following thee, O Virgin, joining chorus with radiant lamps, preceding thee into the holy place, O pure one, as thou wert the holy ark of God, saith David, the ancestor of God.

Let the gates of the temple of the Lord be made ready, and let the house of glory be opened wide, and, rejoicing, let them receive her who alone is far greater than the heavens and surpasseth understanding, and let them hymn Christ the Savior.

Let the portals of the most divine temple be opened, let them receive the gate of heaven within themselves; let human nature keep festival, and let the angels leap up, all of them celebrating with us the entry of the Mother of God.

And 5 stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII—

O divinely wise father Metrophanes, from thy youth thou didst love to search for the wisdom of the heavenly world, and when thou didst acquire it from God through asceticism and prayer, thou didst not hide thy talent in the earth, but unceasingly teaching and laboring pastorally, thou didst increase it an hundredfold, and wast a hierarchical beacon to the Church. Wherefore, as a reward for thy blessed labors, having now entered into the joy of thy King and Master, pray thou in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

O venerable father Metrophanes, holding captive thy mind and heart in obedience to God, thou didst not take care for thyself, but for the glory of God. For, laboring in the work of the noetic vineyard of Christ, every branch that bare not fruit didst thou actively and zealously cut off with the sword of the Word of God, and didst maintain the Faith and pure morals like a fence by thy godly life, which was like unto that of an angel. And now, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the hand of the Lord, pray thou in behalf of our souls. *Twice*

O God-bearing father Metrophanes, with understanding didst thou divide the word of truth entrusted to thee; for, keeping untiring watch over the house of the Lord and maintaining vigilance over souls without slumbering, thou didst instruct thy flock to please God in word and deed. Wherefore, like a good shepherd, to the Son of God, the Chief Shepherd, didst thou render good report concerning the stewardship He entrusted to thee. Pray thou in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Let us hymn today in sacred manner the adornment of holy hierarchs and the glory of the fathers, and let us praise Christ our God, the King of kings. For, lo! as Sanctifier of saints and Creator of wonderworkers, He so glorified him with the splendor of miracles, that the emperor and princes, hierarchs and priests, and all the right-believing people, receiving grace and healing from his precious relics as from a much-healing spring, cried with compunction: Rejoice, treasury of the gifts of God, blessed and holy hierarch Metrophanes!

Now and ever..., of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of St. Metrophanes, in Tone V—

Such a hierarch befitted us, who was holy, righteous, merciful, blameless in all the precepts of the Lord. Come ye, and with hymns and spiritual psalms let us radiantly join chorus today, crying out thus to him: Rejoice, lover of the customs of the fathers, pillar and foundation of the Faith! Rejoice, thou boast of Voronezh, most sacred and God-bearing Metrophanes!

Flesh and blood hath not revealed thee, O divinely chosen and holy hierarch, but the heavenly Father, Whom having pleased with thy godly meekness, like an innocent lamb, thou didst become heir with the ranks of the innocent in the angelic choir; and, now, standing before Him in the highest, pray that He grant us the abundance of His compassions and great mercy.

As is fitting, we bless thee as a beacon of the faith and an angel in the flesh, for thy life was honorable, O Metrophanes, and thy rest is with the saints; for thou didst shine forth in good deeds, as a divinely wise pastor, and wast illumined with thy wonders, as a faithful servant and friend of God. Wherefore, falling down, we beseech thee: Pray for us to the Lord, O holy wonderworker, that He grant our souls great and rich mercy!

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Today is the glorious city of Voronezh adorned with the divine treasure of thy relics, and thy monastery rejoiceth, joining chorus, and the Orthodox boast in thy radiance, O blessed Metrophanes. Pray thou that our faithful hierarchs be granted length of days in continual health, and that the people be granted tranquility, fertility of land and great mercy.

Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone—

David foretold thee, O all-pure one, foreseeing the sanctification of thine entry into the Temple. Therein do the ends of the earth, holding festival today, glorify thee, O all-hymned one. For, O Mother of the Word of life, who before giving birth wast Virgin and after giving birth remained incorrupt, today Zachariah maketh merry in the Temple, accepting thee, O Mistress; and the Holy of Holies rejoiceth, receiving thee, the wellspring of our life. Wherefore, we also cry out in psalms to thee: Beseech thy Son and our God in our behalf, that He grant us great mercy.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II—

With what reverent lips shall we hymn Metrophanes, the humble and holy hierarch, emulator of the humble Chief Shepherd, sharer in the struggles of the great fathers of the Church and heir to their lofty manner of life, pure man of godly desires, faithful servant of the Lord, steadfast lover of the precepts of the Church, whom Christ our God doth crown, Who hath a multitude of compassions and great mercy.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

With what sacred hymns shall we bless Metrophanes, the divinely wise hierarch, instructor in the Orthodoxy of the Gospel, teacher of abstinence, converser with angels, nourisher of the poor and the orphaned, defender of the oppressed, unexcelled physician of the afflicted, whom Christ our God doth crown, Who hath a multitude of compassions and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

With what crowns of praise shall we honor Metrophanes, the blessed pastor, beacon of the Church, glory of the city of Voronezh, confirmation of the Russian realm, model for monastics, crown of the priesthood, sacred adornment of hierarchs, whom Christ our God doth crown, Who hath a multitude of compassions and great mercy.

Glory..., in Tone V—

Rejoice with us today, ye assemblies of Russia, in the radiant memory of our God-pleasing father and pastor, who, having faithfully pleased God in his life, shineth forth in the tomb like a lamp with the glory of his hierarchal virtues, bestowing the sweet fragrance of the Holy Spirit from the incorrupt treasure of his relics. Wherefore, assembling, let us form a common choir for him, crying out with hymns divine: Remember us, O father, and pray to Christ for us, for thou art our great intercessor, O Metrophanes!

Now and ever..., of the feast, in the same tone—

Rejoice, O heaven and earth, beholding the only immaculate Virgin, the noetic heaven, coming forth to be raised in honor in the house of God! To her did Zachariah cry out, marvelling: “O portal of the Lord, I open unto thee the gates of the temple! Rejoice therein, joining chorus! For I have come to know and believe that the deliverance of Israel is manifestly coming, and that God the Word will be born of thee, granting the world great mercy!”

After the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of the saint, twice, and that of the feast, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord...,” the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory..., the troparion of the saint; Now and ever..., the troparion of the feast, again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

Having adorned thy soul with virtues and run the course of this fleeting life in the fear of God, thou didst find grace with God; standing before Him with the angelic choirs, entreat Him, O Metrophanes, to grant us eternal life and great mercy.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I —

Being thyself the Holy of Holies, O Theotokos, thou wast brought to live in the Holy of Holies, as is meet, as an animate ark of the Lord and a truly divine habitation of the Holy Spirit, O Virgin Mary. Wherefore, thy Son, Who is the only-begotten of the Father, and is consubstantial with the Holy Spirit, made His abode within thee without the aid of man, deifying all mankind.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this Sessional hymn, in Tone II—

Having guided thy flock well, thou didst render good account unto God, the Chief Shepherd, receiving just recompense from His hand; O Metrophanes our father, pray thou that, according to His rich mercy, through thine intercession, He vouchsafe us a blessed abode in the Kingdom of the saints.

Glory..., Now and ever...: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV —

The whole world is filled with gladness today on the right notable feast of the Theotokos, crying aloud: She is the tabernacle of heaven!

Polyeleos, and this Magnification of the saint—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Metrophanes, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God for us!

Selected Psalm—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation.

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared.

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I hymn Thee.

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise and tell of all Thy wondrous works.

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth.

A I have hated the congregation of evildoers, and with the ungodly will I not sit.

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God.

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages.

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee.

Glory..., Now and ever...

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—

Rendering hymns of thanksgiving unto God for all the glorious things that, through thee, have taken place in the holy Church by the grace of God, and glorifying His godly condescension, we entreat thee, O Metrophanes, holy hierarch of Christ: Help us all to find grace and mercy on Judgment Day.

Glory..., Now and ever..., Theotokion—

Thou alone art the root of virginity and the unfading bloom of purity; thou hast broken the head of the serpent. Deliver us from our transgressions and from defilements of soul, O Theotokos, and guide us to the haven of true repentance.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord!

Reading from the Gospel According to St. John

§35, from the midpoint \(10:1-9\)

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: he who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All who ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, most blessed Metrophanes, ardent favorite of Christ, our speedy mediator and fervent intercessor before God: a helper amid our misfortunes and a comforter amid griefs be thou unto us that honor thy memory with love.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos, and that of the saint, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “O Mistress, grant me the grace of discourse”, the composition of George, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her Entry.

O all-pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing fountain of grace; and we pray thee: Rain down drops of knowledge upon us, that we may praise thee forever.

Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O all-pure one, thou wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His advent.

Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled them to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!

The glorious portal which thoughts cannot pass, having opened the doors of the Temple of God, doth now command us that have assembled to delight in her divine wonders.

Canon of the saint, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Full of great despondency because of our many evils, we flee to thee, O Metrophanes, holy hierarch of Christ, and we now beg of thee speedy aid and assistance.

Attacks of the passions confound us, O venerable pastor. Calm us by thy right acceptable mediation before God.

Having delivered us from misfortunes and sorrows, O holy Metrophanes, grant manly progress in the virtues unto all, that we may all rejoice in thee, O most sacred Metrophanes.

*Theotokion:* Accept thou our supplications, O all-holy one; and that by thine all-powerful entreaty we may be delivered from enemies, visible and invisible, from sin and every torment, entreat thou Him Whom thou didst bear: God, Who loveth mankind.

Ode III

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth today appear as that which adorneth the bride for her wedding.

David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, and declareth thee, O all-pure one, the queen adorned, who standeth in the Temple before our King and God, O most pure one.

From her, from whom transgressions went forth among the human race, hath her correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into the house of God.

The angelic armies and a multitude of all men leap for joy, and they advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the house of God.

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

O our ever-glorious father Metrophanes, we honor thee as the protector of our life and intercessor for us before God. Guide us on the path of repentance, O adornment of hierarchs and confirmation of the faithful.

We beseech thee to put an end to the turmoil of our souls and the demonic slanders within us. For to thee, O holy one, hath the grace of the Holy Spirit been given to expel evil spirits.

Falling sick in body, we are afflicted also in soul, O divinely blessed one. Leave us not to perish in our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted in body and soul as a man, so help us now who are tempted.

*Theotokion:* O all ye hosts of angels, thou Forerunner of the Lord, ye twelve apostles and all saints: With the Theotokos make supplication, that we be saved.

Sessional hymn, in Tone II—

Thou didst live piously in the episcopal rank, O divinely revealed and holy hierarch, and didst guide the people to knowledge of God by word and deed, and wast utterly pleasing unto God. Wherefore, thou hast been honored by Him with incorruption and miracles, O father Metrophanes, as one that shareth in the grace of God.

Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

O David, go thou before us into the Temple of God, and, rejoicing, receive thou our Queen, and cry out unto her: Enter thou, O Lady! Enter thou into the Temple of the King! Her glory is understood allegorically, for from her doth Christ the Light desire to pour Himself forth upon all!

Ode IV

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God—the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin—the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to those who are on earth!

The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.

All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvelous; for the Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God’s dispensation.

Revealed as temple and palace and animate heaven, O divine bride of the King, thou art brought today to the Temple of the Law to be kept for Him, O all-pure one.

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Extinguish within us the flame of carnal turmoil and our impure thoughts, that by thy prayers, O Metrophanes, we may be delivered from the flame of the fire of Gehenna.

We stretch forth to thee our soul and mind, O divinely chosen and holy hierarch: Warm thou our faith and love for God, that, earnestly following His law, we may run the course of our salvation unhindered.

Having obtained thee from God as a tower of strength, free from danger are we protected by thee from enemies, visible and invisible. Wherefore, as is meet, we all bless thee, O Metrophanes.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, bridal chamber of the never-waning Light, we are not worthy of the heavenly banquet hall because of our sinful guilt. Yet, for the sake of thy sweet Son, our good Lord, Who was stripped naked upon the Cross, O Theotokos, cover thou the shame of our face and save us.

Ode V

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

The all-pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King of all, as He Himself doth know.

Zachariah, beholding once the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.

O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy growth; strange also, most glorious and unutterable by men, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.

A most radiant lamp, O Bride of God, thou hast shone forth today in the house of the Lord and dost illumine us with the precious gifts of thy wonders, O pure and all-hymned Theotokos.

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* Enlighten us with Thy commandments, O Lord, and with Thine upraised arm grant us Thy peace, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

We beseech thee and cry out most earnestly: Fill our life with gladness, O divinely inspired one, protecting us beneath the mighty shelter of thy defense from famine, plague and civil strife; for what thou wishest, thou canst do, O father.

Drive away the gloom of our offenses and the pride of our life with the radiance of thy prayers, O Metrophanes, that, receiving remission of sins through thine aid, we may obtain mercy from Christ God.

Grant thy helping hand to me who lie upon the bed of affliction and despondency, O pastor beloved of God, and leave me not bereft of thine enlightenment, which saveth by the grace of the Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* O thou who art far more pure than the ranks of the angels, thou of whom the Source of sanctity was incarnate for our sake, that He might hallow human nature: Through thy prayers, O Theotokos, deliver us from the miry clay of our impure deeds and unseemly words.

Ode VI

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Thou Who hast upheld all things by Thy word hast hearkened to the prayer of the righteous ones. Wherefore, Thou hast loosed the infirmity of the barren woman, in that Thou art compassionate, and hast given them her who is the cause of joy.

Desiring to make His salvation known to the gentiles, the Lord hath now taken from among men her who hath not known wedlock, as a sign of reconciliation and renewal.

As a house of grace, wherein treasures of the ineffable dispensation of God are laid up, O most pure one, thou didst share in unfading delight in the Temple.

Receiving thee as a royal diadem, O Bride of God, the Temple hath been made splendid and hath mounted to higher things, beholding in thee the fulfillment of the prophecies.

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Be thou an aid to thy city and a protector of thy monastery; with the invincible intercession of thy supplications defend thou the cities and lands of those who honor thy memory with love, that in thee we all may boast, O divinely wise Metrophanes.

Knowing thee to be a defender sent by God, and one who hath great authority over unclean spirits, we entreat thee to preserve our souls unharmed by the evil activity of evil spirits.

As is meet, the faithful bless thee, crying out: Rejoice, O Metrophanes, for thou art truly the joy and boast of the Church of Russia and a victory over all enemies for those who honor thee, O right wondrous one!

*Theotokion:* The prophets call thee the noetic mountain and the ladder of Jacob, whereby God hath come down to man, intent upon searching for the lost coin, which finding, He again ascended to heaven. Wherefore, we all magnify thee in Orthodox manner as the Mother of God.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII—

Having enslaved thy body to thy spirit through abstinence, and rendered thy soul angelic, thou wast robed in hierarchical vestments as the crown of the priesthood; and standing now before the Master of all, entreat Him, O most blessed Metrophanes, to calm and save our souls.

*Ikos:* Adorning thyself in the wilderness, like a flower of paradise, with lofty humility of mind thou wast adorned on the throne of the Church of Voronezh with exalted adornments, O most wise one. For thou wast a true hierarch, a model for the faithful in word and life. Wherefore, God hath raised thee up as His favorite, glorifying thee in His Church with incorruption and miracles, that with faith we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, thou boast of Voronezh, ever memorable Metrophanes!

Ode VII

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Lo, today a joyous spring hath burst forth upon the ends of the earth, enlightening our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us mystically hold feast this day!

Let all things—heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitude of men—bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry out: Our joy and deliverance is brought to the Temple!

The Scriptures have come to pass, the Law hath faded like a shadow, and rays of grace have shone forth upon thee who hast entered into the Temple of God, O pure Virgin Mother, wherein thou art blessed.

Heaven and earth and the netherworld are subject to thine Offspring as Creator and God, O most pure one, and every nation of mortals doth confess that the Lord and Savior of our souls hath appeared.

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Wishing to renew us and to hasten our salvation, O Savior, thou didst raise up a new beacon for Thy Church—Metrophanes, who crieth to Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O holy hierarch of Christ, in our behalf entreat thou the Savior, Who loveth mankind, that we be freed from our transgressions and defilements of soul, and that we may cry out to Him as our Almighty Deliverer: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou hast been shown to us by God as a wonderworker and a holy hierarch arrayed in the glory of God, O all-praised Metrophanes, that, illumined by the splendor of thy miracles more greatly than with the rays of the sun, we may cry out to Him Who worketh wonders through thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Through thee have we received great gifts from the Lord, O all-pure Virgin. Wherefore, we offer thee a hymn of thanksgiving, and cry out: Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Mistress!

Ode VIII

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden! Let Gabriel give utterance unto the true and ancient counsel of the Most High: “Make ready to receive God, for through thee hath the Infinite One come to dwell with men!” Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Anna, once, leading the all-pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marvelling, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The handmaid of God have I been, answered Anna unto him, and I call upon Him with faith and prayer to accept the fruit of my birth-pangs, that, having received this child, I might bring her who was born unto Him Who bestowed her. Wherefore, I cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Truly this is a matter of the Law, the priest said to her, and strange doth this thing seem unto me, beholding her who doth most gloriously surpass the holy ones in grace led into the house of God. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* The King of heaven, Whom the hosts of angels hymn, praise and exalt ye supremely for all ages!

Having recourse to thy precious relics as to an unassailable shelter, we ask thine unceasing intercession, O venerable and God-bearing one. Disdain not those who ask help of thee, but hearken and help all who hymn thee and exalt Christ supremely forever.

O father Metrophanes, who dost graciously transform bodily weakness and spiritual affliction by the power of thy prayers, do thou transform all the infirmity of those who hymn thee and exalt Christ supremely forever.

Thou dost wipe away the tears of those who weep, O most blessed pastor, and dost bestow a hand of salvation upon those who are in danger. Wherefore, at the throne of the Master remember us who with faith hymn thee and exalt Christ supremely forever.

*Theotokion:* We magnify thy steadfast assistance; we confess the power of thy maternal entreaty; we give thanks unto the Lord Who hath magnified thee and was born of thee; Whom do thou beseech, O Mother of God, that our souls be saved.

Ode IX

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

The divine maiden Mary, the fruit of the promise, issued forth from the righteous Joachim and Anna, and, a babe in the flesh, she is brought into the holy sanctuary like pleasing incense, to dwell in the Holy of holies.

With hymns let us praise her who was a babe by nature and was supernaturally revealed as the Mother of God; for she is led unto the Lord in the temple of the law, as the fragrance of sweet savor for the righteous, as the spiritual fruit of her righteous parents.

O ye faithful, with the angel let us as is meet cry out to the Theotokos “Rejoice!” Rejoice, O most comely Bride! Rejoice, O radiant cloud, from whom the Lord hath shone forth upon us who sit in the darkness of ignorance! Rejoice, thou hope of all!

Canon of the saint

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

O Thou Who plantest Thy favorites in Thy house like olive trees and cedars, through the supplication of Metrophanes Thy favored one, O Savior, plant within us a virtuous life, that in due season we may bring forth the fruits of repentance for Thee.

Rejoice with the angels, O Metrophanes most wise, thou servant of the Holy Trinity, and by thy prayers grant that we that bless thee in faith may rejoice in the Holy Spirit.

Though we are weak and sin exceedingly, unworthy as we are, yet may we not lose the hope of thy mighty protection, O right glorious one. Praying to Christ God, do thou help us all to find a place with the choirs of the righteous on the day of judgment.

Show forth the wonder of the power of thy prayers upon me who am brought low in misery in the place of affliction, O holy wonderworker Metrophanes; and according to the grace of healing given thee, transform thou my sickness into health.

*Theotokion:* O Mary, Bride of God, our hope and joy, shelter us beneath thy precious veil, that we may unceasingly praise and hymn thy name, magnifying thee with the bodiless choirs.

Exapostilarion—

With hymns let us praise Metrophanes, the blessed pastor, the radiant beacon of faith which divinely and most gloriously shone forth from the Trinity, the Origin of light, and hath enlightened us with his wonders which are more radiant than the sun.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

With faith let us praise the divine Maiden Mary, whom the company of the prophets of old proclaimed to be the jar, the staff, the tablet and the unquarried mountain; for she is led today into the Holy of holies to be raised for the Lord.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone VIII—

In thy life thou didst travel the narrow way, O venerable Metrophanes, fighting the good fight in the wilderness, and thou didst finish the good course in the rank of hierarch, laboring with all thy soul for God, and faithfully pleasing Him utterly, as a vessel chosen of God. Wherefore, generous recompense didst thou obtain from the just Bestower of rewards, the Lord and King of saints. Him do thou beseech, O holy one, that He grant peace to the Russian Church, and great mercy to our souls. *Twice*

Having acquired a pure life, patience, meekness and love unfeigned, perfect abstinence, divine compunction, faith, true hope and loving-kindness, O Metrophanes, thou didst live on earth like an angel and dost stand in heaven with the choirs of angels. Pray with them, O holy one, that peace be granted the Russian Church, and great mercy to our souls.

Illumined with the divine grace of the Holy Spirit, after death thou dost still pour forth the grace-filled myrrh of healing from thy precious relics. Wherefore, we rejoice in thee as is fitting, O Metrophanes, and, celebrating thy memory in sacred manner, we cry out to thee with sacred hymns: Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who worketh healings for all through thee!

Glory..., Now & ever…: Of the feast, in Tone VI—

O Virgin Bride of God, more holy than the saints, who gavest birth to the Master of all, Who is One of the Trinity, beseech Him, that He deliver from misfortunes all who hymn thee.

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from odes IV and V of the canon of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon to the saint.

Prokimenon, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews

§318 \(7:26-8:2\)

For such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

For the feast: Epistle to the Hebrews, §320

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Alleluia, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

Reading from the Gospel according to St. Luke

§24 \(6:17-23\)

At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

