The 25th Day of the Month of November

Leave-taking of the Feast of the Entrance of the Mother of God into the Temple

Commemoration of the Holy Equal of the Apostles Clement, Archbishop of Okhrid, Enlightener of the Slavs

& Wonderworker of Bulgaria

At Little Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Come, all ye who love the feasts of the Church, and in vigil let us together chant the hymn: By thy supplications save us who honor thee from all temptations and all sorrow, O divinely inspired Clement! *Twice*

Thy temple and the shrine of thy relics impart healing to men’s souls and bodies, as a wellspring of healing and a scourge driving the demons away; and thine honored image, O Clement most wise, is the consolation of the grieving.

Forsaking worldly relations and passionate attachments to earthly things, thou didst perfect an immaterial life and hast been numbered among the incorporeal beings; and abiding now with them, O ever-memorable Clement, preserve those who hymn thee.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Rejoice with us, all ye Slavic peoples, for our first pastor, the common intercessor of all, looking down upon his honored temple today, helpeth all by his supplications. Wherefore, praising him as is meet, let us cry out to him: Cover us with the shelter of thy supplication, O most magnificent hierarch Clement, we beseech thee!

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

David foretold thee, O all-pure one, foreseeing the sanctification of thine entry into the Temple. Therein do the ends of the earth, holding festival today, glorify thee, O all-hymned one. For, O Mother of the Word of life, who before giving birth wast Virgin and after giving birth remained incorrupt, today Zechariah maketh merry in the Temple, accepting thee, O Mistress; and the Holy of Holies rejoiceth, receiving thee, the wellspring of our life. Wherefore, we also cry out in psalms to thee: Beseech thy Son and our God in our behalf, that He grant us great mercy.

On the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…\_—

Let us chant unto God Who hath given the most godly Clement as free healing unto the souls and bodies of His servants.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Having acquired thee as a compassionate deliverer, a fervent intercessor and a citizen of heaven, we bless thee as is meet, O Clement our father.

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

Thy name is like myrrh poured forth, O divinely wise one; wherefore, the souls of the virtuous faithful have come to love thee all the more, as doth the God-loving Maiden.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O honored Theotokos, adornment of the apostles and glory of holy hierarchs: Entreat thy Son in our behalf, that we may be saved.

Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV—

With thy discourses thou didst guide the nations to the Faith of Christ, and by thy works thou didst lift thyself up to divine life, O holy hierarch Clement, equal of the apostles, shining forth miracles upon those who approach thee with faith, and all-gloriously illumining the Church with signs. Wherefore, we glorify thine honored memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Troparion of the feast, in the same tone—

Today is the prelude of God’s good will and the proclamation of the salvation of men. The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God and proclaimeth Christ unto all. To her let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the Creator’s dispensation!

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise…”—

With what wreaths of praise today shall we crown Clement, who duly made the foolishness of the flesh subject to the Word of God, who despised the unseemly passions and fulfilled the commandments of the Gospel, who by his discourse guided all to divine instruction, who enriched the Church with hymnody and adorned it with icons, and who led the people to most perfect salvation, by the power of Christ our God Who hath great mercy? *Twice*

With what divinely inspired hymns today shall we praise Clement: the branch of the Vine of life, who budded forth a life of virtue and was cultivated by God the Husbandman, who abounded greatly in fruit and produced the gifts of the Spirit *—* divinely inspired discourses *—* like fragrant flowers of paradise, and incorruptible struggles like the wine of grapes which maketh glad the hearts of men, through the grace of Christ our God Who hath great mercy. *Twice*

With what words of goodly utterance shall we today honor Clement: the heavenly man who dwelt on earth in the flesh, who amassed the thrice-rich treasure of the virtues and now abideth in spirit with the angels, who first perceived the wisdom of God in indistinct images, as in a mirror, but now in blessedness gazeth directly, face to face, upon the divine Light: Christ our God, Who hath great mercy. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Nourished by the milk of the virtues, thou didst attain the summit of perfection; for having set thyself ablaze with the fire of love, and utterly reduced the fœtid passions to ashes, thou becamest a model of abstinence and meekness, a wellspring of mercy and abyss of compassion. O most holy father Clement, thou most speedy aid and ready help, stand thou now in spirit before those who call upon thee with faith, and deliver us from tyrannical sin, for thou hast great boldness before the Lord.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

After thy nativity, O Mistress, Bride of God, thou didst go to the Temple of the Lord to be raised in the Holy of Holies as a consecrated maiden. Then was Gabriel sent to thee, the all-immaculate one, bringing food unto thee. All of the heavenly powers marvelled, beholding the Holy Spirit abiding within thee. Wherefore, O all-pure and undefiled Mother of God, who art glorified in heaven and on earth, save thou thy race.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three Readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

A Reading from Proverbs

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the light, she is found preëminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the holy hierarch—

*In Tone I:* The wondrous hierarch Clement, the great clarion of the Truth, doth today summon all to gladness, O ye who love the feasts of the Church. Wherefore, let us all go forth to greet the splendid festival of the good pastor, O ye faithful, glorifying his sacred works with hymns, that through his supplications we may receive from Christ great mercy.

*In Tone II:* When the myrrh of grace was poured forth upon thee and made thee the sweet fragrance of Christ, thou wast anointed to act as priest of the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, and to fill all the land of the Bulgars with the sweet savor of its wisdom. Wherefore, fervently accepting the prayerful cries of thy servants, O ever-memorable Clement, ask thou that great mercy be granted unto us.

*In Tone VI:* Having received the grace of miracles from on high and enlightened the Slavic peoples with the word of the Gospel, thou art become the glory and boast of holy hierarchs, the great preacher and apostle of all Bulgaria, O most blessed father Clement. Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before the Lord, entreat Him, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone V—

Arrayed in the vestments of the priesthood, O champion of the Spirit most great, thou didst stand before the throne of the tyrant and wast imprisoned in a dungeon, being punished for preaching the Gospel of Christ, and showing forth martyric opposition. And when thou didst receive thy freedom through God’s intervention, thou didst hasten to the newly converted Bulgars, and by thy word didst boldly sow the seed of the Sower, Who hath great and rich mercy.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone—

The day of joy and the most honored feast hath shone forth! For today she who remained Virgin after giving birth, as she was before birthgiving, is led into the temple of the Lord, and the elder Zachariah, the father of the forerunner, rejoiceth and crieth out in gladness: “The intercessor for the sorrowful draweth nigh unto the holy temple, in that she is holy, to be hallowed in the habitation of the King of all! Let Joachim, her forebear, be glad, and let Anna rejoice! For they have offered unto God the unblemished Mistress like a heifer three years of age. Rejoice, ye mothers! Leap up, O virgins! Ye barren women, join chorus! For the Queen of all, who hath been foretold, hath opened unto us the kingdom of heaven! Rejoice, ye people, and be glad!”

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec, Mel.: “Having set all aside…”—

Having cleaved wholly to the Master from thy youth, O divinely wise Clement, thou didst transcend the flesh and every worldly relationship, drying up the flow of the passions with the sponge of the virtues; and thou didst draw thy liberated mind away from earthly attachments unto the noetic habitations, where now, drawing nigh unto the throne of Christ our God, pray thou with boldness in behalf of our souls.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

Taking up voluntary poverty and the labor of ascetic struggle, O divinely wise Clement, thou didst show forth on earth an angelic and immaterial life. Wherefore, as a shepherd of the reason-endowed flock for these labors thou hast received as reward the gifts of the Spirit, an unfathomable sea of miracles. O perfection of the priesthood, paragon of monastics, true prophet of things to come and apostle of the Slavs: earnestly entreat Christ our God in behalf of our souls.

*Stichos:* Moses and Aaron are among His priests, and Samuel among those who call upon His name.

Following Cyril, the enlightener of the Slavs, O divinely wise Clement, and treading in the steps of the holy hierarch Methodius, thou didst set their manner of life as thy model, like a tablet graven with virtue. And having Nahum, the vessel of the Spirit, as thy fellow struggler in thine apostolic labors, and a whole choir of honored disciples, thou didst establish the Bulgars in the pure Faith of Christ our God, Whom do thou entreat with boldness in behalf of our souls.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

As thy life was divine, O blessed and holy hierarch Clement, so was thine end sacred. And when all the inhabitants of Okhrid, having assembled in a multitude, beheld thee bereft of breath, they cried aloud with voices of lamentation, saying: “Speak thou one last word to thy servants, O eloquent preacher of the Word! Whither goest thou, that thou leavest behind thy children, upon whom thou didst have pity, as a compassionate father? Yet even though thou hast been laid in the tomb, we who honor thee with love have acquired thee on high as an intercessor and advocate before God!”

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone—

Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple of the Lord, who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye on before, doing homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, for she ever prayeth for our souls.

At the blessing of the loaves, the troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV—

With thy discourses thou didst guide the nations to the Faith of Christ, and by thy works thou didst lift thyself up to divine life, O holy hierarch Clement, equal of the apostles, shining forth miracles upon those who approach thee with faith, and all-gloriously illumining the Church with signs. Wherefore, we glorify thine honored memory. *Twice*

And then the troparion of the feast, in the same tone—

Today is the prelude of God’s good will and the proclamation of the salvation of men. The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God and proclaimeth Christ unto all. To her let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the Creator’s dispensation!

At Matins

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the holy hierarch; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Having been nurtured with the divine dogmas, thou didst guide the Bulgarian people to the divine Faith, leading them to baptism and making them the chosen people; and thou didst deliver them from divers passions. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that we be granted great mercy.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels…”—

The fruit of the righteous Joachim and Anna is offered to God in the holy sanctuary, the nourisher of our Life who became a babe in the flesh, whom the sacred Zachariah blessed. With faith let us all bless her as the Mother of God.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Having studied the law of God thoroughly from childhood, thou didst confirm the people therein by thy divinely eloquent teachings, and by thine honored manner of life thou didst instruct all to disdain the flesh and the beautiful things of the world, and to look ever toward heaven and divine delight, which do thou pray that we may receive who venerate thine honored memory with faith.

Glory…; Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone & melody—

Even before thy conception thou wast consecrated to God, O pure one, and, having been born on earth, thou hast now been offered to Him as a gift, fulfilling thy parents’ vow; and having been presented in the divine temple, accompanied as a babe by lighted lamps in purity, thou hast been shown to be the receptacle of the unapproachable and divine light, as the temple of God. Truly great is thy going forth, O only Ever-virgin Bride of God!

Polyeleos, and magnification—

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father Clement, who by thy teachings hast enlightened the Slavic peoples and led them to Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Taking up the zeal of the apostles of Christ, with all thy heart thou didst embrace the whole land of Bulgaria, preaching the Gospel of Christ to the people, and leading an innumerable multitude forth from deception. Wherefore, having finished the race, as saith the Apostle Paul, thou hast received a crown worthy of thy labors. O blessed and holy hierarch, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thine honored memory with love.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Let David the psalmist rejoice, and let Joachim and Anna join chorus, for the radiant Mary, the divine lamp, issued forth from them like a holy fruit, and she rejoiceth, entering the temple. Beholding her, the son of Barachiah blessed her, and, rejoicing, cried out: “Rejoice, O wonder of the universe!” *Twice*

Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 35 from the midpoint \[Jn. 10: 1-8\]

The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Taking up the most sublime philosophy and penetrating to the uttermost depths of wisdom, thou didst unite thyself unto the King of all, O holy hierarch Clement; and thou didst show forth the riches of the divine Scriptures like a clear mirror. Wherefore, having made clear the Greek tongue unto the Slavs and enlightened the people with piety, thou didst receive from God a blessed end, and prayest for us who glorify thee with faith and love.

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the holy hierarch, with 8 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, the composition of Basil,

in Tone I

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

Let us hasten today, honoring the Theotokos with hymns, and let us celebrate a spiritual feast; for she is offered to God in the temple as a gift.

With songs let us hymn the glorious arrival of the Theotokos; for today, as the prophets foretold, she is borne into the temple as a gift of great price, though she is herself the temple of God.

*Triadicon:* O Trinity One in essence *—* Father, Word and Holy Spirit: Thee do we glorify with faith as the Creator of all, and unto Thee do we piously cry aloud: Save us, O God!

*Theotokion:* Arrayed in purple vesture dyed in thy blood, O all-pure one, God the King, issuing forth, hath restored the whole human race in His compassion.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Come ye, and with spiritual hymns let us praise the splendid memory of the holy hierarch Clement, in whom the whole Church, enlightened, glorifieth Christ.

Shining forth in the world like the sun, O holy hierarch Clement, thou illuminest the whole world with thy life; and do thou therewith also enlighten me, I pray.

The radiant day of thy memorial hath dawned, O holy hierarch Clement, illumining all the faithful who have assembled in thy holy church and glorify thee.

*Theotokion:* In hymns, as is meet, let us magnify the Virgin who gave birth unto Christ, the gate of heaven whom the prophets proclaimed.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch, the composition of Demetrius Chomatianus, Archbishop of Okhrid, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Shining with immaterial enlightenment, and leading a pure life, O blessed one, thou becamest a companion of the angels and a light unto the faithful by thy virtuous manner of living.

Unto the people who had become lost in the ways of perdition through the deception of Satan didst thou show the paths of piety. Wherefore, O ever-memorable one, with hymns we glorify thee as a divinely eloquent apostle of the Lord.

Manifestly emulating Timothy instead of Paul, the enlightener of the whole world, thou didst follow after Methodius and Cyril, the preachers of the Faith. Wherefore, thou hast been glorified with them, O divinely wise one.

Thou didst love God with all thy heart, and didst wholly reject the beautiful things of this world; wherefore, I beseech thee: By thy supplications free me from enslavement to the flesh, for it giveth rise to enmity towards God.

*Theotokion:* With thy fervent aid give me the strength to keep the honored commandments of the Savior, O all-pure one, that with love I may glorify thee who in giving birth preserved the glory of virginity intact.

*Katavasia:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven above the waters and didst found the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us keep festival and rejoice together in spirit, revelling today on the holy feast of the daughter of the King, the Mother of our God.

Rejoice today, O Joachim! Be thou glad in spirit, O Anna, leading to the Lord the three-year old child born of thee, as though she were a pure and most immaculate heifer.

*Triadicon:* The Father is light; His Son is light; and the comforting Spirit is also light: for the Trinity, shining forth as from a single sun, doth divinely illumine and preserve our souls.

O pure one, the prophets proclaimed thee as the ark of the sanctuary, the gold censer, the lampstand and table; and we hymn thee as the tabernacle which held God.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Come ye all, let us honor Clement, the adorner of the Church, praying that peace never cease for his flock, and that mercy be imparted to our souls.

Falling down before thy holiness, O blessed one, with compunctionate voices we cry unto thee: Mercifully regard us in thy supplications, we beseech thee!

Setting the whole world of the Slavs afire with the rays of literacy, thou shinest forth like the sun in thy discourses of golden luster, whereby do thou illumine us, we beseech thee.

*Theotokion:* Having ineffably given birth to the Effulgence of the Father, the Author of all creation and Savior of our souls, establish us in the love of thee, O all-pure one.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Neither in wisdom, nor in power, nor yet in riches do we boast, but in Thee, O Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father; for none is holy save Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

With the wisdom of thy words thou didst elucidate the Faith, and didst teach the people, who had turned aside into the deception of polytheism, to worship the one Trinity.

With the power of the Spirit Comforter shutting the mouths which blasphemed against Him, thou didst put to shame the chief heretics, dealing a blow unto them.

Serving God with a blameless life, O blessed father, like Aaron of old thou didst offer up sacrifice, praying for thy flock.

I have no tear-drops to wash away the defilements of my soul; wherefore, bathe me in thy supplications, pouring forth upon me a stream of repentance.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, thou rich mountain which David foresaw in the Spirit, I entreat thee earnestly: Turn me who am astray in the mountains of despair!

*Katavasia:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—

Thy temple, O holy one, is all-gloriously shown to be spiritual healing for those who approach it with faith; for it delivereth all from divers sicknesses, and lulleth all the passions of men’s souls to sleep. Wherefore, O most blessed one, we call thee our fervent intercessor.

*Ikos:* Let us all now hymn the hierarch of the Bulgarian people, reverently approaching his temple; and let us kiss the divine shrine of his relics, saying unto him: O divinely wise father, thou art our pastor and teacher! Cease thou never to preserve thy city and people, for, trusting in thine earnest supplications, O most blessed one, we call thee our fervent intercessor.

Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Together let us with praises honor the great and holy hierarch, who hath nurtured all with books of discourse and illumined the world of the Slavs with the rays of the Spirit. Wherefore, assembling, let us glorify his holy struggles as is meet, and cry out to him: O glorious Clement, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

With gladness Mary, the Theotokos, is all-gloriously brought into the house of God: the unblemished ewe-lamb, the undefiled bridal-chamber, whom the angels of God escort with faith and all the faithful ever call blessed and hymn her unceasingly with a loud voice in thanksgiving: Thou art our glory and salvation, O most immaculate one!

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst announce, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Prophet Isaiah, prophesy unto us: Who is the Virgin who will conceive in her womb, who, springing forth from the root of Judah, shall give birth to the right glorious Fruit of the holy seed of King David?

O virgins, commence ye to chant hymns, holding candles in your hands, and praising the arrival of the pure Theotokos who now cometh to the temple of God, and celebrating with us!

*Triadicon:* Let us piously glorify the true God, the Trinity of Persons, the Unity in image, Whom the ranks of angels and archangels hymn as the Master of creation, and whom men ever worship with faith.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure and pure one, unceasingly entreat thy Son and God to Whom thou gavest birth in the flesh, that He deliver all thy servants from the multifarious snares of the devil and from every assailing temptation.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Christ hath given thee to the world as a pastor, entrusting to thee the flock of the elect, O blessed one; wherefore, thou shinest forth like the sun, illumining those who pray to thee.

Having purified soul, body and mind, O wise Clement, on earth thou wast as lustrous as gold, a vessel worthy of the all-holy Spirit.

All creation glorifieth thy labors today, O holy hierarch Clement; wherefore, enlighten and grant us remission of sins by thy supplications.

*Theotokion:* O all-immaculate one who didst seedlessly conceive the Creator of all, lifting up thine all-pure hands, with thy pinions cover us in the world, and deliver us from the wrath to come.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The precious coffer of thy holy relics driveth the demons away, healeth incurable sufferings, and delivereth from multifarious evil circumstances those who hasten thereto; wherefore, we glorify thee with faith.

We honor thee dead as one living, O blessed one; for thou bearest the activity of imperishable life, receiving the grace of miracles. Wherefore, we cry out: Glory to Him Who hath filled thee with grace!

Once a year, the Pool of Siloam wrought a single cure; but the shrine of Clement ever dispelleth countless multitudes of all manner of ailments.

I ever commit sins in thought, word and deed; wherefore, I have removed myself far away from Thy countenance, O Lord. Yet, turning me, save me, a prodigal, through the constant supplications of Thy holy hierarch.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou gavest birth in the flesh to the immutable Master, Who desired to save man. Wherefore, by thine intercessions turn me to repentance who turned to a prodigal life.

*Katavasia:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light upon us who rise early unto the judgments of Thy commandments, O Master Christ our God, Who lovest mankind.

O all ye Orthodox, let us take up lamps, hastening to glorify the Mother of God, for she is led to the Lord today as a right acceptable sacrifice.

Let thine ancestors be glad today, O Mistress; and let her who gave thee birth rejoice with thy father, for their fruit is offered to the Lord.

*Triadicon:* Glorifying the one all-originating and ever-existing Godhead, we worship the indivisible Essence in three Persons, equal in honor and glory.

*Theotokion:* Ever delivered from misfortunes and tribulations, O Theotokos, we have acquired thy prayer as a right tranquil haven and an invincible bulwark amid evil circumstances.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

We all fall down before thy holiness, O Clement, high priest of the Savior, crying out with voices of compunction and tears: Forget not those who pray to thee!

Having led an angelic life on earth, thou receivest honor equal to that of the angels; and standing now with them before the Master, pray thou for thy flock.

Ever offering up sacred service unto God, by thy spiritual discourse thou didst bring all to piety. Therewith illumine me also, I beseech thee.

*Theotokion:* As thou hast maternal boldness before thy Son, Who was born for the salvation of men, disdain not our prayers, O all-pure one, for thee do we have as our only helper after God.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

By the power of the Spirit thou didst sow thy preaching in the ears of those who loved vanity, O father, and thou didst reap the grain of piety in abundance.

Willing to bear the mortification of Christ ever in thy flesh, thou didst have Him living within thee, as Paul saith; and He hath caused thee to dwell in the land of the living.

Receiving the cries of thy servants, O thou who art most rich, by thy supplications deliver us from all manner of ailments, evil circumstances and future condemnation.

As thou art a river of healings, O wondrous one, by thy supplications dry up the torrent of my pernicious passions, and cleanse my soul with streams of tears.

*Theotokion:* In thee, O pure one, have virginity and the title of mother been united; for in manner past understanding thou gavest birth to the Creator. Wherefore, perceiving thee to be both Mother and Virgin, we glorify thee.

*Katavasia:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me who cry out: Glory to Thee!

O ye faithful, let us celebrate the spiritual feast of the Mother of God, chanting piously; for she is more holy than the heavenly intelligences.

With spiritual hymns let us praise the Mother of the Light, O ye faithful, for she hath appeared to us today, going forth into the temple of God.

*Triadicon:* O Father, Son and upright Spirit, Unity in three Hypostases, indivisible Trinity: have mercy upon those who worship Thy divine might.

*Theotokion:* Contained in thy womb, O all-pure Mother of God, He Whom nought could contain issued forth from thee in two natures: God and man.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou hast been shown to all the Churches as a rain-laden cloud, O holy Clement. And now, pray thou to the Master, that He pour forth the dew of the Spirit upon us who hymn thee.

The Church of Okhrid, to which thou camest, is illumined, honoring thy labors. Preserve thou from misfortunes those who venerate thine honored memory.

Thundering forth heavenly doctrine like thunder, with a thunderous voice, and causing thy golden lips to ring forth like cymbals, thou hast catechized the whole world, O blessed and divinely eloquent Clement.

*Theotokion:* Cease not to make entreaty in our behalf, O Virgin Theotokos, for thou art the confirmation and divine strength of the faithful.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church crieth unto Thee, cleansed of the blood of demons by the blood which, for mercy’s sake, flowed from Thy side.

Like a star thou didst hasten to illumine the lands of the Slavs, lifting up to the light of the knowledge of God those who because of the passions slept in the darkness of ignorance.

With the oil of thine aid anoint the heads of those who surround the precious shrine of thy relics and honor thy venerable precepts.

Thou didst set at nought the malevolence of the heretics, who uttered blasphemy against the Spirit in the highest, and thou didst strengthen the power of pious dogmas.

Set me above the malice of the malevolent, for thou hast boldness before the Master, O great and holy hierarch, and be thou for me a refuge most strong.

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, render thy Son merciful unto those who piously confess thee to be the Theotokos, and grant us thine abundant mercies.

*Katavasia:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

The most pure temple of the Savior, the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, the sacred treasury of the glory of God, is on this day brought into the house of the Lord, bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. To her do the angels of God chant the hymn: She is the heavenly tabernacle!

*Ikos:* Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be above all creation, visible and noetic? Wherefore, desiring to praise her, I am greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, making bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is the heavenly tabernacle!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The furnace was bedewed, O Savior, and the children, dancing, chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us join chorus and hymn the pure Mistress, honoring Joachim and Anna as is meet.

Prophesy, O David, giving utterance in the Spirit: The virgins that follow after thee shall be brought to thee into the temple of the Queen and Mother.

*Triadicon:* We glorify the indivisible Trinity, and we hymn the one Divinity: the Father, the Word and the most Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* The Lord to Whom thou gavest birth, do thou entreat, in that He is compassionate by nature, O Theotokos, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Standing round about thy precious tomb with fear, O holy hierarch, we cry out to thee with a voice of compunction, asking deliverance from our sins.

Turn not thy face away, O blessed Clement, but pray thou to Christ God the Deliverer, that He vouchsafe unto us His mercy.

Stretch forth unto supplication thine all-honorable hands, O holy Clement, and defend us from all evils, strengthening and sanctifying us.

*Theotokion:* O thou who without seed didst contain the Creator in thy womb and ineffably gavest birth unto Him, entreat Him as His Mother, that He save our souls.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Keeping vigil in prayer, thou didst shake off slumber from thine eyelids, and with untiring vigilance thou didst drive the pestilent from thy flock, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Thou dost adorn the choir of the apostles as an orator of divine eloquence, dost fulfill the multitude of passion-bearers like a martyr, though thou didst not shed thy blood, and didst form a company of priests as a standard-bearing hierarch, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Even the teaching of children was not hidden from thee, for by means of letters thou didst perfect them in piety; and they cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O thrice-blessed one, my soul, which is tormented by cruel passions, do thou show forth through good works to be a vine of goodly branches laden with fruit, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth, O Maiden, to the Angel of Great Counsel, Whom we glorify as the Creator of angels and Savior of men, saying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Katavasia:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Joachim rejoiceth today in splendor, and the blameless Anna offereth to the Lord God a sacrifice: the holy daughter given her according to God’s promise.

The holy David and Jesse render praise, and Judah offereth homage; for the pure Virgin, of whom the preëternal God was born, grew forth as fruit from their root.

*Triadicon:* Let the Thrice-holy One be hymned: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Unity, the one Godhead, Who holdeth all creation in His hand for all ages!

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* The Word Who is without beginning receiveth a beginning in the flesh, being born of the Virgin Maiden as was His good pleasure: both God and man, restoring us who before were fallen, in His extreme loving-kindness.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Dwelling with the incorporeal hosts, and standing with them before Christ God, pray thou in behalf of those who celebrate thine honored memorial, chanting: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Look thou mercifully upon the nestlings whom thou hast nurtured beneath the shelter of thy wings, and hast delighted with thy words sweet as honey; and, stretching forth thy hands, bless thou thy disciples, who chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With the blessed Cyril and the splendid Methodius thou didst blossom forth as on a mountain. With them do thou ever pray for thy flock, which chanteth: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O Mother of God, who in the flesh gavest birth to the Savior, free us from the bonds of the passions, and pray that we may be saved, who chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Stretching forth his hands, Daniel shut the lions’ mouths in the pit; and the young lovers of piety, girded about with virtue, quenched the power of the fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having nailed thyself to good things which pass understanding and disdained visible things, thou didst preserve thy life in a manner surpassing human strength, and hast been shown to be a precious vessel of the Spirit, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Having yearned for living waters like a thirsty deer, when thou didst drink thereof thou becamest an inexhaustible wellspring of divine dogmas and awesome miracles for those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Be thou a haven for me who founder upon the deep of life, and still thou the violent waves of temptations for me who call upon thee as intercessor and cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* With the radiance of thy fervent entreaties illumine my soul which hath been darkened by the passions, O thou who art full of grace, and with the light of repentance show me to be a child of the noetic Light, who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Katavasia:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

At Ode IX the Magnificat is not chanted, but we chant the refrain of the feast:

Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon which the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like rain upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

The divine maiden Mary, the fruit of the promise, issued forth from the righteous Joachim and Anna, and, a babe in the flesh, she is brought into the holy sanctuary like pleasing incense, to dwell in the Holy of holies.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul, the dominion of the indivisible Godhead in three Hypostases.

*Triadicon:* Let us glorify the indivisible Trinity, the Essence in three Hypostases, the undivided glory, Who, in a single Godhead, is unceasingly hymned in heaven and on earth, piously worshipping the Father, the Son and the Spirit.

*Refrain:* Magnify, O my soul, the all-pure Theotokos, who is more honorable and more glorious than the armies on high.

O Virgin Theotokos, pray thou, that we who flee with faith beneath thy compassion and piously worship thy Son as God and Lord of the world be delivered from corruption, misfortunes and all manner of temptations.

Canon I of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

*Refrain:* O holy hierarch Clement, equal of the apostles, pray unto God for us!

Be thou not mindful of my countless sins, O blessed and holy hierarch, but, lifting thine all-pure hands on high, raise me up who lie amid pernicious sins.

Thee do I entreat, O holy hierarch Clement, and to thee do I stretch forth my hands, shed tears and bend my knees, begging release from my countless transgressions through thy supplications.

O blessed one, ask thou victory from heaven against the foes who wage war upon the pious, and deliver Christian warriors and the Orthodox people from all evils, that we may bless thee as is meet.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos who without seed didst conceive the Creator of angels and gavest birth in the flesh unto our Savior: Earnestly beseech Him, that He grant us remission of sins, that we may magnify thee as is meet.

Canon II of the Holy Hierarch

*Irmos:* Christ, the Chief Cornerstone uncut by human hands, Who united the two disparate natures, was cut from thee, the unquarried mountain, O Virgin. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.

Having instilled the words of everlasting life in thy sanctified flock, and perfected it with the dogmas of piety, O thrice blessed one, thou hast hastened to the habitations of heaven.

That thou mightest be vouchsafed greater glory in the heavens, thou didst show thy life on earth to be free from enslavement to any passion; wherefore, thou hast inherited a free city.

On high the Church of the firstborn rejoiceth, O thrice blessed one, and below it glorifieth the grace of miracles which God, Who is ever glorious in His saints, hath bestowed upon thee.

Honoring thee as a hierarch of Christ and luminary of the Church, O God-bearing Clement, we entreat thee with voices of hymnody: O venerable one, disdain not the prayers of thy servants!

*Theotokion:* Deliver from misfortunes and all tribulations those who with mouth, soul and heart confess thee to be the Theotokos, O Virgin, for thou hast boldness before the Lord Who was born of thee.

*Katavasia:* A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, Whom praising, we magnify.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars…”—

O sacred and wise Clement, thou glory of hierarchs, who hast illumined thy Church like the sun: thou pourest forth miracles upon the whole world.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

With faith let us praise the divine Maiden Mary, whom the company of the prophets of old proclaimed to be the jar, the staff, the tablet and the unquarried mountain; for she is led today into the Holy of holies to be raised for the Lord.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Virgins bearing lamps, escorting the Ever-virgin with splendor, truly prophesy the future in the Spirit; for the Theotokos, as the temple of God, is led as a child with virginal glory into the temple.

Truly the Theotokos hath appeared to the world as the right glorious fruit of a holy promise, for she surpasseth all. Piously led into the temple of God, she fulfilleth the supplication of her parents, and is preserved by the divine Spirit.

Faithfully raised on heavenly bread, O Virgin, in the temple of the Lord, thou hast given birth to the Word, the Bread of life, for the world, to Whom thou wast mystically promised beforehand by the Spirit as the chosen and most immaculate temple, betrothed to God the Father.

And 3 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O divinely wise Clement our father, through restraint of the passions of the flesh and the intense asceticism of thy life thou didst furnish thyself with wings to soar aloft to the exalted love of the never-setting divine Sun and the all-desirable blessedness of heaven, the delights wherein thou didst ever share. Standing in spirit before the throne of Christ, the King of all, entreat Him, that He save our souls, in that He is full of loving-kindness.

O divinely wise Clement our father, receiving from God vesting as a hierarch, thou wast a good pastor of the city of Okhrid, and didst shepherd well the people of the Lord, leading all Bulgaria to piety with divine discourses and teachings, and the revelation of all-glorious miracles. Wherefore, we honor thee, glorifying Christ, Whom do thou entreat, that He save our soul, in that He is full of loving-kindness.

O divinely wise Clement our father, thou didst shine forth from the West more radiantly than the sun, emitting the rays of thy words and illumining the ends of the world. Thou hast been shown to be the firm foundation of the Church and an unshakable pillar of piety; thou hast put the darkness of heresies to flight and glorified Christ in Orthodox manner. Him do thou entreat, that He save our souls, in that He is full of loving-kindness.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Let us all praise Clement, the holy hierarch of Christ, the boast of the Slavs and confirmation of the Orthodox, the glory of Bulgaria and tireless intercessor for the whole world; and let us unceasingly say unto him: Rejoice, O Clement, most sacred among the fathers! Rejoice, fountain of miracles and treasury of healings which cannot be plundered! Rejoice, glory of hierarchs and boast of monastics! And now ask thou forgiveness of sins and salvation of soul for us who celebrate thine honored memorial with splendor.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone II—

Today the most immaculate Virgin is brought to the temple, to the habitation of God, the King of all, the Nourisher of our whole life. Today the most pure and holy one, is led to the Holy of holies like a heifer three years of age. Let us cry out unto her like the angel: “Rejoice, thou who alone art blessed among women!”

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IX of Canon I of the feast, and 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the holy hierarch.

Prokimenon, of the feast in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos—

My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.

*Stichos:* For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

—and this prokimenon of the saint, in Tone I—

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

Epistle of the feast, and of the saint:

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 320 \[Heb. 9: 1-7\]

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Epistle to the Hebrews, § 318 \[Heb. 7: 26-8: 2\]

Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Alleluia of the feast, in tone VIII—

*Stichos:* Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.

*Stichos:* The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.

—and also of the saint, in Tone II—

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

Gospel of the feast, and for the saint:

Gospel according to Luke, §54 \[Lk. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28\]

At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said: “Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.” And Jesus answered and said unto her: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.” And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him: “Blessed is the womb that bore Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked.” But He said: “Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.”

Gospel according to Matthew, § 11 \[Mt. 5: 14-19\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

Communion Verse of the feast, and that of the saint—

I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

