The 27th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The Holy Greatmartyr James The Persian

Commemoration Of Our Venerable Father Palladius

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Having forsaken the beauties of the world, the splendor of thy birthright, wealth and comeliness, and cast aside all sensuality, and broken thy body through the wounding of the passions, rejoicing thou didst follow after Christ, O James; for through thy suffering thou hast now truly become a partaker of glory and a fellow heir of the kingdom. *Twice*

When the members of thy flesh were cut off, O right glorious James, martyr of Christ, enduring unbearable pain and wounds, and manfully trampling the savagery of the tormenters underfoot, thou didst receive a priceless crown of victory; and now adorned therewith, O blessed one, thou dost stand, with those who suffered with thee, before the throne of thy Master. *Twice*

Possessed of boldness before Christ, O ever-memorable martyr, thou dost fervently intercede for all who celebrate thine honored festival with faith, delivering them from misfortunes and freeing them from the passions, rescuing them from besetting evils and granting their souls salvation by thy divine supplications, that we may glorify thy splendid struggles. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone V—

Thou didst astonish all in thine endurance of tortures, O James; for thou didst suffer the amputation of thy fingers, hands and arms, and likewise thy feet and legs, until thou wast left with thy trunk alone; and then, as thou didst pray, thy precious head was severed. O much-suffering martyr, cease thou never to pray to Christ in our behalf, that our souls may find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice…”—

The ewe-lamb, once beholding her Lamb hastening to the slaughter, followed diligently, crying out these things to Him: “Whither goest Thou, O Christ, my Child most sweet? Wherefore dost thou tread so rapid a course without wavering? O sinless Jesus most desired, greatly merciful Lord, grant that Thy handmaid may speak; O my Son most beloved, Compassionate One, spurn not in silence her who in strange manner gave birth to Thee Who bestowest great mercy upon the world, O most compassionate God!”

At the Aposticha, the stichera from the Octoechos. Glory…, of the martyr, the composition of George the Syngellus, in Tone VIII—

Assembling with faith today, O ye who love to look upon things divine, behold the strange and noetic contest of James of Persia, who hath shone upon us like the star which appeared to the magi, guiding us to true knowledge; for that valiant one, when he fell, destroyed those who fought against him, and when his members were severed, he rendered those who tortured him impotent, for he was strengthened by the providence of the Most High, crying out: “Even though ye sever my material limbs, yet do I have Christ, Who hath spiritually become all things to me!” Wherefore, foreseeing the life to come, which lieth through death before all, he hastened to pass over to it, and abiding therein, he entreateth God, the Bestower of crowns, that He grant cleansing, enlightenment and great mercy unto us who celebrate his memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

“What is this sight that I see, which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who sustainest all creation dost die, lifted up upon the Tree, granting life unto all,” weeping, the Theotokos said when she beheld the God-man suspended upon the Cross, Who had ineffably shone forth from her.

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

In his sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyr James received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Or this troparion, in the same tone—

Thou hast astonished all by thy terrifying torments and the valor of thine endurance, O much suffering one, most wondrously uttering prayers of thanksgiving to the Lord as each of thy members was severed from thy body. Wherefore, receiving a crown amid thy suffering, thou hast ascended to the throne of Christ God, the King of heaven. Entreat Him, O James, that He save our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, or stavrotheotokion.

At Compline

Canon to the Holy Palladius, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thy life, O most blessed father”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Illumined with divine splendors, O venerable one, drive away the clouds from my mind, that I may behold thy luminous life and the correction found in thy manner of living.

Having from thy childhood risen early unto God, the Sun of righteousness, O thou who art most rich, thou didst avoid the darkness of the carnal passions through abstinence and wast enriched by the gift of miracles, O venerable one.

Having acquired noetic purity through dispassion, thou becamest a habitation of the Spirit, O right wondrous and most blessed Palladius, adornment of the fathers, universal beacon.

*Theotokion:* O only Bride of God, thou didst bear in thine arms Him Who sitteth in the highest yet became man; for thou art a worthy receptacle of the Ruler of all ages.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine commemoration establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Offering unto God Almighty all-night supplication with vigilant mind, O father, thou didst lull the carnal passions to sleep. Wherefore, thou hast become for us all a never-tiring intercessor.

Having mortified thy members with abstinence, O father, thou didst enliven thy soul with divine turnings, enlivened by the virtues and the powers of the Creator, O Palladius, father of fathers.

*Theotokion:* With drops of thy mercy, O Maiden, quench the burning coals of the passions and light the lamp of my heart, which hath gone out, O Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou golden candlestand, most immaculate one.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God—the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin—the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

By the all-accomplishing power and grace of our God, the King of all, thou didst truly escape the wickedness of the incorporeal foe, O divinely inspired father Palladius.

Celebrating the festive memorial of our eminent and honorable father, let us spiritually rejoice, delivered from misfortunes by his sacred entreaties.

Thy shrine poureth forth an ever-flowing stream of healings, O glorious Palladius, and cleanseth those who have recourse thereto of their defilements, bodily and spiritual, O father of fathers who wast pleasing unto God.

By thy supplications deliver us from all the wiles of the serpent, O venerable one, and heal our cruel infirmities by thine entreaties to the Master.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast truly been shown to be the God-containing temple of the King of all, O all-immaculate Theotokos. Wherefore, with confidence we, the faithful, piously offer thee Gabriel’s “Rejoice!”.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Thou didst overturn the carnal passions with great abstinence, O divinely blessed one. Wherefore, divine grace hath been given thee to heal the sufferings of the faithful who have recourse to thee, O all-glorious father Palladius.

Having rendered thy life holy, O most blessed one, thou wast numbered among the saints of ages past who were God’s servants, and dost sanctify the souls of all who praise thy precious miracles.

Truly blessed wast thou, O right glorious one; for, as one guileless and meek and adorned with goodly ascents, thou didst tread the path of the justifications of God Who seeth all things.

*Theotokion:* Humanity was far removed from God, O Virgin; but when thou didst ineffably conceive the Savior, O divinely joyous one, it entered again into paradise, blessing thee with faith, O most hymned one.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Taking upon thyself a pure life of abstinence, as though thou wast thyself incorporeal, thou didst stand in all-night vigils, O wise one, praying copiously with true faith and godly humility.

Adorned with visions of what is good, thou wast seen to be like an angel abiding in the flesh, and, passing on, thou hast made thine abode with the angels, O divinely blessed father Palladius.

Having the angels as thy helpers, thou didst dispel the demons’ illusions and all their wickedness, and without hindrance didst tread the path which leadeth to life, O divinely blessed one.

*Theotokion:* When thou didst listen to the words of the divine Gabriel, O most immaculate Maiden, thou didst conceive the Word in thy seedless womb, and gavest birth to Him ineffably.

Lord, have mercy. *Thrice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

Living the monastic life in God-pleasing manner, O our God-bearing father, thou didst search for God with prayer and fasting, and didst become a pure habitation of the Spirit, shedding rays of virtue upon the faithful, whereby thou dost illumine all who honor thee. Glory to Christ Who hath glorified thee! Glory to Him Who strengthened thee! Glory to Him Who performeth healing for all through thee!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

By the all-glorious demonstration of thy miracles thou dost illumine the souls of all who have recourse to thee with the grace of the Almighty Who enlightened thy soul and showed it to be brighter than the sun.

Loving the Lord most perfectly with upright mind, O most wise one, thou wast perfectly loved by Him, and thou didst receive the grace to expel evil spirits and to heal all infirmities.

God Who seeth all things, accepting the outpourings of thy tears imparted to thee a share of the angels’ consolation, which those who have served God with upright heart receive.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the merciful Lord, O pure one who alone art full of God’s grace, pray thou that by His right hand He may have mercy upon me who am ever cruelly buffeted by the griefs of life.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

With divine power thou didst annihilate the destructive hordes of the demons, and thou didst receive the grace to banish ailments and to expel unclean spirits, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having lived in God-pleasing manner, O most blessed one, thou hast now manifestly fallen into the deserved sleep of the just and hast been transported to endless delight, O venerable one, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Most gloriously doth thy shrine pour forth healings for those who run to it, O blessed father Palladius, dispelling infirmities and causing sufferings to cease; and bowing down before it we hymn thy life, pangs and divine struggles, O beacon of monastics.

*Theotokion:* Fill me with divine waters, O Virgin who gavest birth to the Wellspring; deliver me from the burning heat of sin, O portal of divine life; and guide me to life who cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Through the power and grace of God thou wast able to vanquish the serpent who boasted in his mindlessness, and to crush his vile head, trampling it underfoot, O father. Wherefore, assembling, with compunctionate soul we call thee blessed.

In the lofty eminence of thy manner of life thou wast shown to be a heaven adorned with miracles as with divine stars, and thou dost illumine the souls of those who ever piously approach thee and honor thy struggles with faith, O God-bearer, luminary most radiant.

Thou didst staunch the flow of the passions with the streams of thy tears, O venerable one, and pourest forth streams of miracles for those who have recourse to thee, O thou who art blessed of God. Thou didst ever dispel the burning heat of the passions, O glorious Palladius, precious adornment of the Church.

Like a sweet-smelling rose thou didst manifestly blossom forth in the Church of Christ and hast perfumed the ends of the world with thy wondrous fragrance. Wherefore, we celebrate thy divine memory, whereon beg thou for all remission of our many offenses, O God-bearer.

*Theotokion:* Light from Light shone forth from thy womb, O Ever-virgin Mother, and dispelled the darkness of deception and illumined all the ends of the earth. Wherefore, with faith we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou boast of the venerable!

Stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

*Stichos:* O venerable father Palladius, pray to God for us.

Thy mind illumined with light, O most blessed Palladius, was a pure temple of the three-Sunned Godhead, noetically receiving the divine rays of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* O venerable father Palladius, pray to God for us.

Having angels as thy companions, strengthening thee, O wise one, thou didst dispel the illusions of the demons and their wicked activity, O father, and didst tread the path which leadeth to divine rest. Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

*Glory…:* Emulating the pure God, thy Creator, with purity of soul, O wise and glorious God-bearer, thou didst offer thyself to Him as a pure sacrifice, as an observer of His precepts. Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.

*Now & ever…, Theotokion:* O most holy Maiden, full of God’s grace, thou all-pure temple of God, more spacious than the heavens and more holy than the cherubim: fill my mind with grace and illumine the eyes of my heart, granting me remission of all transgressions through thy right acceptable mediation.

*Or this stavrotheotokion:* The unblemished Virgin of old, beholding on the Tree God to Whom she had given birth from her seedless womb, unable to bear the wounding of her womb, said in anguish: “O Thou Who sustainest all creation, how is it that thou art crucified upon a Cross as one condemned, desiring to save all mankind?”

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, without the martyria; and that of the greatmartyr, with 6 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With songs do I hymn the Persian martyr James”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

Standing now before the throne of Christ as one crowned, O glorious martyr James, by thy supplications grant me radiant illumination and grace from heaven.

Issuing forth from the east, O martyr James, thou hast shone upon us like a radiant dawn and hast illumined the Church of Christ with the effulgence of thy sufferings.

Having shown youthful resistance, as a victor thou wast vouchsafed the honors of a successful combat and eternal glory, O martyr James.

*Theotokion:* The trumpets of the prophets announced thee, proclaiming the mystery wrought in thee, O Virgin Theotokos, for they beheld thy wonders from afar.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establish us in thee, O Lord Who hast slain sin by the Tree, and plant the fear of Thee in the hearts of us who hymn Thee.

Thou wast like a choice vine of Christ, pruned with the sickle of torments, and which, bearing much fruit, is offered up in the wine-press of the Savior.

Thou didst sensibly perceive the corruption and instability of transitory things, O crown-bearer; and as one with acute intelligence thou didst prefer the stability of those things which abide forever.

Thy body, dismembered by the savagery of the torturers, won thee splendid crowns, O James, and the delight of the food of paradise.

*Theotokion:* Mankind, united hypostatically to the Master of all through thy divine birthgiving, O Virgin Bride of God, hath manifestly received mercy.

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Christ hath caused the godly and ever-memorable martyr James to shine forth from Persia like a newly-manifest star; wherefore, he hath dispelled the darkness of deception and shone forth the grace of the Spirit upon the faithful. Therefore, let us keep his memory with faith and cry out, saying: O much suffering athlete, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love celebrate his holy memorial. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Having fallen into the mire of sins, I have no firm place for me to stand, and the storm of transgressions hath grievously engulfed me; but in that thou gavest birth to the Word Who alone loveth mankind, look upon me, thy servant, and deliver me from every sin, from the soul-corrupting passions and all the oppression of the evil murderer, O Theotokos who knewest not wedlock. Entreat Christ God, that He grant me remission of sins, for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.

Stavrotheotokion—

The Virgin, the Mother of the Deliverer, standing before the Cross, cried out maternally, groaning with pain and tears: “What is this strange and all-glorious sight which I see, O my Son? Thou Who pourest forth dispassion upon all men hast been crucified on a Cross between two condemned thieves, pierced in the side, and given gall to eat, all by hands which Thou didst make! But arise and grant remission of transgressions unto those who with faith hymn thy divine sufferings!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, and have glorified Thee Who alone lovest mankind.

Revived by the armor given thee by God, O glorious one, thou didst reduce to ashes all the deception of those who worship fire.

Ask thou cleansing for us who celebrate thy precious memory, O martyr James, in that thou dost possess boldness.

The torrents of blood gushing forth from thy members, O thrice blessed one, have quenched all the flame of falsehood.

*Theotokion:* Direct thou my thoughts to the calm haven of thy dispassion and purity, O all-pure one.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Thou wast truly like goodly and right fertile earth, broken apart by the plough of bitter torments, O wise one, bringing a goodly harvest to the Creator.

With the blood of the severed limbs of thy body thou didst extinguish the burning arrows of the enemy, O thrice-blessed one; for thou wast shown to be protected by hope and faith.

As each of thy members was cruelly cut away, O all-wise one, as a goodly lamb thou didst offer to Christ a hymn of victory and fitting praise.

Thou givest me cleansing of the defilements of my soul, O glorious martyr of Christ, through thy pangs, bestowing deliverance through the streams of thy blood, O most lauded one.

*Theotokion:* Clearly offering a genuine cry to thine honored and awesome Offspring with heart and tongue, we now call thee the pure Theotokos.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Having sensibly accepted the instruction of thy friends, O glorious one, rejoicing, thou didst hasten to the struggle and didst receive the crown of victory.

Suffering as though in another’s body, O martyr James, thou didst endure dismemberment and didst send up hymnody to the Master.

As a victorious martyr, O all-wise one, thou didst manifestly array thyself in the robe of salvation and the vesture of gladness, which had been dyed in thy blood.

Having traversed the sea of martyrdom, thou didst receive a sacred crown of victory, and now thou joinest chorus with ranks of martyrs as is meet, O glorious James.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth without knowing man, O Virgin, and remainest a virgin forever, showing forth the signs of thy Son and God, the true Divinity.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Persuaded by thy good spouse, O James who wast patient of soul, and fearing rather the dread tribunal, thou didst spit upon the Persians’ command and the fear of them, and didst show thyself to be an honorable martyr whose body was pruned like a vine.

*Ikos:* Let us all sigh from the depths of our souls, pouring forth tears as we envisage the martyr cruelly dismembered by those who were like unto barking dogs, who, gathering together, tore off the limbs of the wondrous martyr, who was valiant in his witness. What then shall I say? If ye desire, wait a little while, and I will tell all with zeal, how one day death came to James, whose body was pruned like a vine.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

When thy body was dismembered, O martyr James, strengthened by divine faith, noetic might and spiritual endurance, thou wast unmoved and unshaken, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Having set thy thoughts on the goal of a higher calling, thou wast not overwhelmed when torments were poured forth upon thee; but, enduring the wounds inflicted on thee by the iniquitous as is meet, dismembered, thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Blessed art Thou, and well is it for thee now, O most blessed one, who vanquished the savage cruelty of the wicked one and the wrath of the tyrant, saying with zeal: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast been shown to be a lampstand of golden luster for the never-waning Light, the Lamp of divine splendor, and thou didst illumine all the world with the radiance of thine honorable virginity, and savest those who chant: Blessed art thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Strengthened by the power of God, O blessed one, thou didst drive off the assemblies and hordes of the wicked, and having mightily dispelled them, thou didst receive a crown of victory, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and supremely exalt Him forever!

Thou didst look upon the severing of thy members as goodly offerings, O martyr, ignoring the attendant pangs, but directing thy gaze rather to the beauteous crowning of martyrs which is to come, which hath been prepared by the just Judge.

Having steadfastly acquired supernatural endurance, thou didst remain like a pillar, O blessed one, fearlessly undergoing the assaults and receiving the darts of the enemy, crying aloud: Bless ye Christ forever!

The soul-corrupting enemy, the author of evil, assailing thee with great fury, and inspiring the torturers to break the strength of thy soul, was unable to accomplish his ends, O glorious one, for Thou didst array thyself in the armor of Christ.

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, we know thee to be the clear fountain of immortality, for thou gavest birth to the Word of the immortal Father, Who hast delivered from death all who exalt Him supremely forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Joining chorus with the martyrs, O thrice-blessed one, and standing as a martyr before the throne of Christ, by thy supplications deliver from cruel misfortunes those who celebrate thy memory today and with gladness honor thy radiant festival.

As a martyr, O James, thou hast now truly made thine abode in the heavens, where the assemblies of the martyrs are, where the holy multitude of all the saints doth rest, where the souls of the righteous are and the Church of the firstborn.

Thou hast taken thy place as a lamp-bearer before the Savior of all, for Whom thou didst endure the severing of the members of thy body and with might didst ignore the fire and wounds of thy trials. Wherefore, with faith and love we all call thee blessed, O James.

Clad now in an embroidered purple robe dyed in thine own blood, thou dost reign with Christ, O James; for through sufferings thou didst find the wellspring of dispassion, in which thou hast been vouchsafed to delight eternally, O most blessed one.

*Theotokion:* Manifestly ascribing to thee a title which befitteth the nature of things, and likewise offering up to thee a divine cry, we glorify thee, the Theotokos, as the one who conceived God and truly became the pure Mother of God.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the holy place…”—

The Lord hath glorified thee as a branch pruned by manifold tortures, as an honored vine which poureth forth wine in the outpourings of thy blood, O athlete James, protector of those who with love keep thy most sacred memory as is meet.

Theotokion—

There is no salvation in me, O Virgin, for I have fallen evilly into the abyss of sin and await the threat of dread torment and the portion of the goats. Take pity upon me before the judgment, for thou art my fervent help, O Theotokos.

At the Aposticha, Glory…, the composition of the Studite, in Tone II—

Enduring amid thy sufferings, O martyr James, thou didst surrender thy body for Christ God, and when thy fingers, hands, arms, and legs were cut off, and finally thy head, thou didst take wing to the heavens, and reignest with the King of all. Wherefore, O most mighty of athletes, cease thou never to pray, that our souls be saved from all the malice of the enemy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, or this stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb willingly led to the slaughter as a man, weeping, she said: “Dost Thou make haste now to leave me childless who gave Thee birth, O Christ? What is this that Thou hast done, O Deliverer of all? Yet do I hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness which passeth understanding and recounting, O Thou Who lovest mankind!”

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath wrought all His desires in them.

*Stichos:* I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might not be shaken.

Epistle to the Ephesians, §233 \[6: 10-17\]

Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.

*Stichos:* Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all.

Gospel According to St. John, §50 \[15:1-7\]

The Lord said to His disciples: “I am the true vine, and My Father is the husbandman. Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit He taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in Me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He who abideth in Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without Me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

