The 30th Day Of The Month Of November

Commemoration Of The Holy And All-Praised Apostle

Andrew, The First-Called

At Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man...,” the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried...,” 8 stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Called from on high...”—

When the hypostatic Effulgence of the Father’s glory appeared, depicted by the light of the Forerunner, desiring, in His loving-kindness, to save the human race, then wast thou the first to have recourse unto Him, O glorious one, being enlightened in mind by the most perfect radiance of His divinity, thenceforth becoming the preacher and apostle of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Thrice*

When the all-holy Word became incarnate, granting us life, heralded by the voice of the Forerunner, announcing the glad tidings of salvation unto those on earth, then didst thou dedicate thyself to Him as first fruits, as the best of offerings, and didst proclaim Him as our God to thy kinsman. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Thrice*

Having been the disciple of Him Who sprang forth from a barren woman, the teacher of piety and chastity, who showed the way to purity, when the Offspring of the Virgin shone forth, then wast thou a most fervent lover of virtue, O blessed Andrew, and, making ascent within thy heart, thou wast caught up from glory to the ineffable glory of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls. *Twice*

Glory..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV—

Leaving behind the netting of fish, O apostle, thou dost trap men with the rod of thy preaching, lowering the lure of piety as a hook and drawing forth all the nations from the depths of falsehood, O apostle Andrew, who art the blood relation of the preëminent one. O clarion-voiced herald of the whole world, fail not in thy prayers in behalf of us who with love and faith ever praise thine honored memory.

Now & ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Dance thou, O Isaiah! Receive the Word of God! Prophesy unto the Maiden Mary: The bush shall burn with fire, yet shall not be consumed by the effulgence of the Godhead! Adorn thyself, O Bethlehem! Throw wide thy gates, O Eden! Come, ye magi! behold Salvation wrapped and lain in the manger, Whose star hath shone above the cave, the Lord and Bestower of life, Who saveth our race.

Entrance. Prokimenon of the Day. Three Readings:

Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who according to His abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Whom having not seen, ye love; in Whom, though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by those who have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance: but as He Who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written: Be ye holy; for I am holy. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear: forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by Him do believe in God, Who raised Him up from the dead, and gave Him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently: being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away: but the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To Whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture: Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he who believeth on Him shall not be confounded.

Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Beloved, Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow His steps: Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth: Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself to him who judgeth righteously: Who His own self bore our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by Whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands: even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.

Reading from the General Epistle of Peter

Beloved, forasmuch as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revelings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you: who shall give account to Him Who is ready to judge the quick and the dead. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to those who are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. And above all things have fervent love among yourselves: for love shall cover the multitude of sins. Use hospitality one to another without grudging. As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth; that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ: to Whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

At the Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera of the apostle, the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, Archbishop of Gortyna in Crete—

*In Tone I:* The apostle Andrew, O Lord, the first-called disciple and emulator of Thy suffering, patterning himself on Thee, led to Thee those who once were deceived in the depths of ignorance, drawing them forth with the hook of Thy Cross. Wherefore, saved, we, the faithful, cry out to Thee: Through his prayers, O All-good One, calm Thou our lives and save our souls.

O ye faithful, let us hymn Andrew, the kinsman of Peter, the disciple of Christ; for, once, dragging the sea with nets, he caught fish; but now with the rod of the Cross he ensnareth the whole world and doth convert the Gentiles from deception to baptism. And, standing before Christ, he entreateth peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Receiving within his heart the noetic Fire which illumineth thoughts and consumeth sins, the apostle and disciple of Christ shineth forth the mystic rays of his teachings into the hearts of unenlightened pagans. And he burneth up the fabulous contrivances of the gentiles as though they were kindling, for the fire of the Spirit hath such power. O strange and fearsome wonder! A tongue of clay, a nature of clay, a body of dust receiveth noetic and immaterial knowledge! Yet, O initiate of ineffable mysteries and beholder of heavenly things, pray thou that our souls be enlightened!

*In Tone VIII:* Seeing the longed-for God walking upon the earth in the flesh, O first-called beholder of God, rejoicing, thou didst cry out to thy blood kinsman: “We have found the Desired One, O Simon!” And to the Savior didst thou cry out with the words of David: “As the hart panteth after the fountains of water, so panteth my soul after Thee, O Christ God!” Thence, adding desire to desire, by thy cross thou hast passed over to Him Whom thou didst desire, as a true disciple and wise emulator of His sufferings on the Cross. Wherefore, sharing in His glory, do thou pray earnestly in behalf of our souls.

Glory..., the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, or of Anatolius, in Tone VIII—

Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he hath drawn forth men from the abyss, wielding the Cross instead of a rod; and lowering a line of power, he bringeth souls up from the deception of the enemy, and doth ever offer them to God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, among the choir of the disciples of Christ, that he may pray with them, that Christ be merciful unto us on the day of judgment.

Now & ever..., Theotokion—

O Mistress, accept the supplication of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “Rejoice...”—

Rejoice, thou noetic heaven which ever declareth the glory of God, thou who didst fervently obey Christ Who called thee first, remaining with Him without falling away. Enlightened by Him thou didst behold the secondary light, and, emulating His goodness, thou dost illumine those who are in darkness with thy lightning. Wherefore, we celebrate thine all-holy festival and joyously venerate the shrine of thy relics, whence thou dost pour forth salvation and great mercy upon those who ask.

*Stichos:* Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

The first discoverer of the virtues of Him Who, in His loving-kindness, was wrapped in our nature, O divinely wise Andrew, thou didst join thyself to Him with ardent love, crying out to thy blood kinsman: We have found Him Whom the prophets proclaimed in the Spirit! Come thou to His beauty, that we may be rescued in soul and in thought, and that, led by the light of His radiance, we may drive away the night of deception and the darkness of unbelief, blessing Christ, Who bestoweth great mercy upon the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

The gentiles who knew not God thou didst draw forth from the depths of ignorance with the net of thy words; and thou dost manifestly trouble the briny waves of the sea, showing thyself to be a most courageous steed of the Master of the seas, O ever-hymned one, and the putrescence of ungodliness didst thou dry up, adding the precious salt of thy wisdom, O glorious apostle; and those who shamelessly take in wisdom which hath lost its savor and know not Christ Who bestoweth great mercy upon the world, have been amazed.

Glory…, the composition of Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople, in Tone II—

In hymns let us honor the apostle Andrew, the kinsman of Peter and disciple of Christ, the fisherman and fisher of men; for, having learned all the dogmas from the teaching of Jesus, he presented them as a lure to the iniquitous fish of the flesh, and ensnared them. By his supplications, O Christ, grant Thou Thy people peace and great mercy.

Now & ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Tell us, O Joseph, how is it that thou leadest to Bethlehem the Virgin, great with child, whom thou didst receive from the Holy of holies? Having searched the prophets and received reply of an angel, I am persuaded that Mary doth ineffably bear God, and magi shall come from the East to worship Him, ministering unto Him with precious gifts. O Lord, Who wast incarnate for our sake, glory be to Thee!

Troparion, in Tone IV—

As thou art the first-called of the apostles and the brother of the preëminent one, entreat thou the Master of all, O Andrew, that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the resurrectional theotokion in the tone of the saint’s troparion.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior…—

With love do we praise thee, O apostle Andrew, as a divine disciple and first-called of all the disciples of Christ, and we cry out to thee with faith: Deliver thy flock, to which thou hast been assigned by God, from every sorrow and need, from temptations and every affliction. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

O honored one, stretching forth thy hands now in pity, bestow upon us aid from the Holy One, and grant that those who glorify thine all-holy birthgiving and ascribe to thee hope and praise, O Mistress and Maiden, may complete this life without misfortune.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Of the divine Faith...”—

Christ found thee to be his first-called disciple, the particular initiate of His mysteries, O blessed Andrew, who diligently exalted His precepts for the whole world. And, as though furnished with wings, thou didst enlighten the states of the gentiles. Him do thou entreat as God, that He grant us great mercy. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O thou who alone art the most pure Mother and Virgin, who surpassest the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplication do thou cleanse me, who, more than all others, am dust defiled with iniquities of the flesh, O pure one, who grantest great mercy.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify thee, O Andrew, first-called apostle of Christ, and we honor the pangs and labors wherewith thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord.

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee.

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth.

A From the rising of the sun unto the setting thereof, the name of the Lord is to be praised.

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world.

A The heavens declared His righteousness.

B And all the peoples saw His glory.

A The princes of Judah are their rulers.

B God is King over the nations.

A God is glorified in the council of the saints.

B Great and terrible is He toward all that are round about Him.

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King.

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders.

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth.

B Their words unto the ends of the world.

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet.

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure.

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God.

Glory..., Now and ever...,

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning...”—

Let us all praise the apostle as one who himself beheld the Word, a divine preacher and a truly spiritual fisher of nations, for we have been brought to knowledge of Christ by the divinely eloquent Andrew, our truly great intercessor, and he now prayeth unceasingly that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Glory..., Now & ever...: Theotokion—

O all-pure Virgin, praying to thy Son with His apostles, free us who unwaveringly place our trust in thee, who art our protection, from divers temptations and evil circumstances, and from cruel misfortune; and save all who hymn thee.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord!

Gospel according to Matthew, §9 \(Mt. 4:18-23\)

At that time, Jesus, walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. And He saith unto them: “Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” And they straightway left their nets, and followed Him. And going on from thence, He saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and He called them. And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed Him. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VIII—

Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he hath drawn forth men from the abyss, wielding the Cross instead of a rod; and lowering a line of power, he leadeth up souls from the deception of the enemy, and doth ever offer them to God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, among the choirs of the disciples of Christ, that he may pray with them, that Christ be merciful unto us on the day of judgment.

Three canons, all in Tone I: that of the Theotokos, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and two of the apostle, with 4 troparia each.

Ode I

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Let us all chant a hymn of victory unto God, Who hath wrought marvelous wonders with His upraised arm and saved Israel, for He is glorious.

As thou art she who alone gave birth in time unto the timeless incarnate Son, O most holy and all-pure one, heal thou all the temporal passions of my most passionate soul.

The wounds of my soul and the hardness of my heart, the blindness of my thought and the distraction of my mind do thou amend by thy prayers, O all-pure one, as thou art full of pity.

O all-pure one, who gavest birth unto the Light, my Deliverer, deliver me from darkness and everlasting torment, that, saved, I may hymn thy mighty works.

O all-hymned one, by thy light dispel the darkness of my mind, O thou who gavest birth unto Him Who is Light, in manner surpassing comprehension; and grant me, O good one, to behold the Light which hath shone forth upon us from thee.

Canon I of the Apostle, the composition of John the Monk

*Irmos:* Thy victorious right arm hath in godly manner been glorified in strength; for, O Immortal One, as almighty, it shattered the adversary, fashioning anew the path of the deep for the Israelites.

My soul, which hath been troubled by wicked thoughts and words, do thou purify with the divine grace which dwelleth within thee, O Andrew, preacher of Christ, that I may pour forth a worthy hymn to thee in purity.

The Forerunner of Christ, who sprang forth from a barren woman, led Andrew, rejoicing, the most eminent and honored of his disciples, to Christ the supremely glorified, Who was born of the Virgin.

With desire and unwavering love beginning to mount the steps of the virtues, ever learning to ascend, from weakness thou didst attain unto the most lofty strength, O Andrew.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O wellspring of grace! Rejoice, stairway and portal to heaven! Rejoice, golden candlestick and jar, and mountain unquarried, who for the world gavest birth unto Christ, the Bestower of life.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Guiding Israel with a pillar of fire and cloud, as God He divided the sea and overwhelmed the chariots of Pharaoh in the deep. Let us chant a hymn of victory, for He alone is glorious!

With the rod of the Gospel didst thou fish, O all-praised Andrew, drawing men forth from the deep of falsehood, as Christ promised, Who taught thee to pursue men as though they were fish.

The divinely inspired Andrew, the pillar of the Faith and seat of the true dogmas of Christ, doth today summon all the ends of the earth to celebrate his yearly festival. Let us therefore make haste, all ye faithful!

Having pursued the fish of the sea with nets, with the skill of a fisherman dost thou fish for nations, tribes and peoples with the net of the Spirit, and most manifestly dost thou plainly disclose to us through the Spirit a lofty depth, O most wondrous one.

O thou who solemnized the mysteries of heaven, eyewitness and propounder of the ineffable knowledge of Christ, thou who received the Holy Spirit from on high, who discourseth, and sitteth among the nations and doth dispense gifts with fire: Pray thou that we be saved.

*Glory..., Triadicon:* With faith I worship the supernatural Unity of the all-unoriginate Trinity, not dividing the Godhead. For It is of a single kind, simple and indivisible. And I unite It by essence and faithfully distinguish the Persons.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* God is born an Infant unto the Virgin, and He reneweth that which, through Adam, hath become corrupt; and He breaketh down the wall of partition and the chamber of enmity with His flesh. And coming forth from His all-pure Mother, He doth annul the curse of our first mother.

*Katavasia:* Christ is born, give ye glory! Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye Him! Christ is on earth, be ye exalted! O all the earth, sing ye unto the Lord, and chant with gladness, ye people, for He hath been glorified!

Ode III

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven upon the waters and founded the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

Dispel all the barrenness of my fruitless thoughts and show forth my soul as fertile in the virtues, O most holy Theotokos, thou helper of the faithful.

O all-immaculate one, who for us gavest birth unto the unwaning Light, deliver me from all condemnation and from the manifold temptations of the serpent, from fire and from darkness.

All condemned do I stand by the dread tribunal, before that unquenchable fire and the stern sentence, O pure one. Haste thou to save me, thy servant, before the end, O good one.

Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O all-hymned Virgin, for with grace divine thou didst, for the sake of His Cross, make those who became corrupt by the fruit of the tree partakers of incorruption.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Thou, Who alone hast known the weakness of human nature, having mercifully formed Thyself therein, Thou dost gird me about with power from on high, that I may chant unto Thee: Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Thou wast not summoned, but of thine own will didst thou run like a thirsting hart to the Wellspring of life, and having found Him thou didst preach Him to all; and having drunk thereof thou didst drench the parched ends of the earth with the waters of incorruption.

Mindful of the laws of nature, O right wondrous Andrew, thou didst take thy kinsman into partnership, crying out: “We have found the Desired One!” And to him who prepared the way by his birth in the flesh thou didst show spiritual knowledge.

From the depths of deception hast thou caught reason-endowed fish in the net of the Word, O apostle, and thou hast brought pure food to the table of Christ: those who have been enlightened by the grace of Him Who appeared in fleshly form.

*Theotokion:* Though thou didst conceive God in thy womb, O Virgin, by the All-holy Spirit wast thou preserved unconsumed, for to Moses the law-giver the unburnt bush manifestly foretold thee, who, aflame, received the unbearable Fire.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Let my heart be made steadfast in Thy will, O Christ God, Who didst establish the second heaven upon the waters and founded the earth upon the waters, O Almighty One.

Cephas and Andrew straightway followed Christ, Who summoned them, saying, “Come, follow Me!”, leaving their father, their boat and nets, for they were visionaries of faith.

Transforming pagan temples into churches, O most honored one, thou didst sanctify therein children of baptism, whom grace hath renewed through water and the Spirit.

Thou didst mystically set before the world the pearl of great price which was hid within the field of thy heart, O apostle, which the gentiles, finding, treasured faithfully.

Taking up the Gospel in thy hands as a treasure, O much lauded one, thou didst enrich all the earth with thy divine preaching. Wherefore, it honoreth thy memory and thy sufferings.

*Glory..., Triadicon:* Let us all hymn in Orthodox manner, in Trinity, the one power of the unoriginate, uncreated, consubstantial, equally enthroned, tri-hypostatic, three-Sunned God, chanting unto Him.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Every mother who beareth a child can no longer be a virgin; but thou, O Virgin Mother, having given birth unto Christ, didst so remain, nourishing our Life with milk and remaining pure.

*Katavasia:* To Christ God, the Son Who was begotten of the Father without corruption before time began, and in latter times without seed became incarnate of the Virgin, let us cry aloud: O Lord Who liftest up our horn, holy art Thou!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom...”—

We honor thee as is meet, O apostle Andrew, as the first-called of all the disciples and an eyewitness and minister of the Word; for, fervently and with unwavering faith, thou didst follow the Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the world. And thereafter thou didst show thyself to share in the sufferings of Him Who willingly endured death for our sake. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who, with love, celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…: Another sessional hymn, in the same tone & melody—

Setting at naught the audacity of the idols and yearning for the sufferings of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be an apostle, O blessed Andrew, raining down wonders from heaven, and wast a teacher of the nations, O most blessed one. Wherefore, honoring thy memory as is meet, in hymns we glorify and faithfully magnify thee, O apostle of the Lord. Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Rejoice, O fiery throne of God! Rejoice, O Maiden, royal seat and lavishly appointed couch, chamber hung with gold-embroidered purple, cloak of scarlet, temple adorned, chariot of lightning, most radiant candlestick! Rejoice, twelve-walled city, gate cast of gold, radiant bridal chamber, magnificently appointed banquet hall and divinely embellished tabernacle! Rejoice, glorious Bride, radiant as the sun! Rejoice, thou who alone art the splendor of my soul!

Ode IV

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the Incarnation of the Word, O prophet Habbakuk, thou didst proclaim, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O most holy Virgin, undefiled tabernacle, with the most pure sprinklings of thy compassions do thou cleanse me now who have been defiled with iniquities, and extend unto me a helping hand, that I may cry: Glory to thee, O pure and divinely glorious one!

Thou hast shown thyself to be the consecrated temple of God, Who, in manner past understanding, made His abode within thee. Him do thou entreat, that He cleanse us of the defilement of sin, that we may be known as temples and habitations of the Spirit.

Have mercy on me, O Theotokos, who alone gavest birth unto the Source of mercy, and by thy supplications put an end to the cruel pain of my soul and the perplexity of my heart, granting me a stream of tears and divine compunction before mine end.

Through the divine Spirit the prophet wrote, knowing thee to be the mountain overshadowed, O pure one. By thy mediation cleanse those who have been consumed by the flame of transgressions, O Virgin, who alone dost set men aright.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Habbakuk, gazing with the eyes of foresight upon thee, the mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, prophesied that the Holy One of Israel would come forth from thee unto our salvation and restoration.

The divine and consuming power of the higher, all-accomplishing and radiant Spirit, Who, in godly manner, made His abode within thee in the form of a tongue of fire, O Andrew, showed thee forth as a preacher of ineffable things.

The most honored Andrew did not take up weapons of the flesh for retribution, even to lay low the strong citadels of the enemy, but, protected by Christ, having captured the nations, he brought them to obedience.

Our superessential God, Who hath assumed our nature, hath shown thee, O Andrew, to be a mountain which poureth forth noetic gladness, destroying the cruel mountains of demonic arrogance.

By thy supplications, O Andrew, do thou never cease to fill with the bountiful gifts of Christ, thy Teacher, those who lovingly celebrate thy memory in song.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thy great and awesome mystery, for He Who ever existeth, hiding Himself from the supramundane legions, descended upon thee like the dew upon the fleece, unto our salvation and restoration, O all-hymned one.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Foreseeing in the Spirit the Incarnation of the Word, O Prophet Habbakuk, thou didst proclaim, crying out: When the years draw nigh, Thou shalt be acknowledged; when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having cast aside thy nets and taken up the Cross, thou didst follow after Christ Who called thee, and, stretching out the net of the Spirit, thou dost catch men instead of fish. Glory to Him Who gave thee the Spirit!

Having received the flaming tongue of the Spirit, thou didst become a man well-pleasing unto God, O apostle, going about the beauties of heaven, recognizing the noetic comeliness therein, and revealing it to us.

Thou didst water the parched desert with thy divine words, O wise one, and didst show it forth as fertile, bearing fruit, the children of the Church, through the broadcasting of the seed. Glory to Him Who gave thee the Spirit!

Perceiving Thine ineffable goodness, O Jesus, Andrew summoned his kinsman, saying: “O Peter, my blood kinsman, we have found the Messiah, Who was proclaimed in the Law and the Prophets! Come, let us truly join ourselves unto Life!”

*Glory..., Triadicon:* O ye faithful, let us hymn the Trinity in Unity: the Father, the Son, and the divine Spirit, One in Godhead, Essence and Nature, indivisible, inseparable, undivided; for He is One God in three Persons.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Having ineffably conceived One of the Trinity in thy womb, thou didst incorruptly give birth unto Him as a Son; yet the Trinity was not at any time added to. And as thou wast pure before giving birth, thou wast kept whole, O Mother of God.

*Katavasia:* A rod from the root of Jesse and blossom therefrom, O Christ, Thou didst spring forth from the Virgin; from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded hast Thou come, incarnate of her who knew not man, O Thou praised and immaterial God. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Ode V

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, for we know none other God than Thee; we call upon Thy name, for Thou art the God of the quick and the dead.

Open thou the eyes of my heart, O pure one, to see clearly the divine radiance and thine ineffable glory, that I may receive mercy and eternal glory.

O all-immaculate one, thou didst give birth unto One of the honored Trinity, Who is one in Hypostasis, two in will. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that we all be saved.

O all-pure one, as thou didst bear our Savior and God, keep thine unprofitable servant safe from all sorrow, sickness and affliction.

Entreat Him Whom thou didst bear in manner surpassing comprehension, O Virgin, that He save those who cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, O all-immaculate Virgin! Rejoice, O blessed one, intercessor for the world!

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who hast enlightened the ends of the world with the radiance of Thy coming and hast illumined them with Thy Cross: with the Light of Thy divine knowledge enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee in Orthodox manner.

Thou didst receive Him for Whom thou didst long, O apostle Andrew, making thine abode with Him in the incorruptible mansions, worthily having harvested the sheaves of thy labors. Wherefore, we glorify thee with hymns.

Thou didst love the Master, and quickly didst thou run after Him, guided towards life by His footprints and unfeignedly emulating His sufferings even unto death, O most honorable Andrew.

Having drawn thee like a mighty arrow, O blessed one, the Lord loosed thee at the world, wounding the demons and healing men wounded by ungodliness.

*Theotokion:* The hosts of heaven are gladdened at the sight of thee, and with them rejoice the assemblies of men; for by thy birthgiving, O Virgin Theotokos, they are united, glorifying thee as is meet.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Illumine our minds with the light of Thy commandments and with the splendor of Thy grace, O God, granting us Thy mercy, for Thy precepts are light and peace, O Good One.

Having yearned for the Cross, O disciple of Christ, through thy cross didst thou obtain the incorruptible kingdom, whereto thou didst draw all the initiates of God with the Cross, granting an inheritance unto us, the theologians thereof.

Thou didst truly search for Christ our Life, and having searched, thou wast first to find Him; and having found Him, thou didst mystically embrace; and having received it in the Giver Himself, thou becamest a treasury of life incorruptible.

The utterances of thy divine thunderings were poured forth in the world and travelled from one end of the earth to the other, for they have circled round like a wheel; and thy lightnings, as David saith, have appeared to the whole world.

Remember us who celebrate thy memory and venerate thy relics, O disciple of Christ. Pray thou ever earnestly in behalf of the flock whose preserver and salvation thou hast been from the beginning.

*Glory...,* *Triadicon:* O ye faithful, together let us glorify God: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Trinity, the tri-hypostatic Kingship, faithfully glorifying It with unceasing theologizings.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Thou didst give birth to the Light knowing not how, O thou who bearest the lamp of the Light of the Sun; and thou wast a new tabernacle of divine light, emitting rays of divine knowledge for the whole world.

*Katavasia:* As God of peace and Father of compassion, Thou didst send Thine Angel of Great Counsel, Who granteth us peace. Therefore, guided to the light of knowledge divine, and waking at dawn out of the night, we glorify Thee, Who lovest mankind.

Ode VI

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me that cry out: Glory to Thee!

Defiled by many sins, I pray to thee who art good, the undefiled tabernacle: Cleanse me of all pollution by thy mediation!

O pure one, be thou a pilot for me who am ever tossed about upon the abyss of evils by the temptations of life, and guiding me to the haven of salvation, do thou save me.

Threefold waves of evil thoughts, assaults of the passions and the abyss of sin bestorm my wretched soul. Help me, O holy Mistress!

Christ ever wrought great things for thee. Him do thou ever beseech, that He magnify in me His great mercy, O thou who art full of grace divine.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* The uttermost abyss hath surrounded us, and there is no one to deliver us. We are accounted as lambs for the slaughter. Save Thy people, O our God, for Thou art the strength and correction of the weak.

Sailing the sea of life in the vessel of thy body, thou didst discover Christ, the Helmsman Who guideth all things, O most blessed one, and thou didst stand before Him rejoicing, O most honored Andrew.

Evil spirits are cast out at thy word, infirmities take flight, a multitude of spiritual passions are driven far away from the afflicted by the grace given thee by God, O Andrew.

Like a gentle wave, moved by a meek spirit, O blessed one, with divine streams didst thou drain the sea of wicked polytheism and didst pour forth rivers of divine knowledge for all.

*Theotokion:* O all-pure Virgin, the ancestors of our race are gladdened on thine account, having received through thee Eden, which they had lost through transgression, for thou art pure both before and after giving birth.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry out: O Good One, free me from corruption! O Savior of the world, save me that cry out: Glory to Thee!

He who was led away from Bethsaida doth summon us to hold festival, having set before us the solemnity of the commemoration of his struggles.

By trade a fisherman, by faith a disciple, plumbing the depths of the heart of the faithful, he doth lower the hook of the word and doth catch us.

Spreading the fire of the love of Christ within thy heart, O disciple, thou didst cry out to the gentiles: Your flame doth burn for Christ, Who hath truly appeared!

Having seasoned your minds with the salt of Christ, your wages have sweetened the heavenly dogmas of unwaning delight for us.

*Glory..., Triadicon:* The Father, the Son, and the right Spirit, the tri-hypostatic Essence, indivisible, let us worship, O ye faithful, crying out: Glory to God in Trinity!

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* At the good pleasure of the Father and through the Holy Spirit was the Son incarnate in thy womb, O pure one, and manifestly did He save that which before was in His image.

*Katavasia:* The sea monster thrust forth, like a babe from the womb, Jonah whom it had swallowed; and the Word, Who dwelt within the Virgin and took flesh of her, issued forth, preserving her incorrupt. He kept her who gave Him birth unharmed, for He Himself was not subject to corruption.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “In supplications...”—

The divinely eloquent namesake of manliness, the eminent follower of the Church, the kinsman of Peter, let us praise, for as of old he was called, so now he calleth us: “Come ye, we have found the Desired One!”

*Ikos:* Of old David constrained a sinner like me to declare the precepts of God honorably. And again he teacheth and with many tears doth ­proclaim: Today, if ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts as Israel once embittered themselves! And he leadeth the rest in psalmody: Come ye, hymn the Lord, all ye lands, for we have found the Desired One!

Ode VII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The fire neither touched nor vexed Thy children that were in the furnace, O Savior; for then, as with one mouth, the three hymned and blessed Thee, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Hallow thou the soul defiled by the passions of me who am ever thy servant, O pure one, and quickly put an end to the grievous captivity of my mind, the hardness of my heart and the assaults of the demons.

O all-immaculate one, enliven my mind which hath been slain by the passions of the flesh, and strengthen me to do that which is pleasing unto God, that I may magnify thee and ever glorify thy loving-kindness.

Cleansing me of the grievous defilement of my lowly soul, O Virgin, from the pursuit of the invisible foe do thou deliver and save me who have been slain by carnal passions, O pure Lady.

Before thee, O most holy, immaculate and pure one, do we, thy servants, ever fall down, day and night, praying with contrition of heart, that by thy supplications thou obtain for us deliverance from sins.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, we, the faithful, perceive thee to be a noetic furnace; for as the supremely Exalted One saved the three children, in thy womb the praised and most glorious God of our fathers wholly renewed the world.

Truly and manifestly hath Thy promise been fulfilled, O Christ, for Thy most divine disciple, rebuking a tempest with a word, transformed it into a peaceful calm. Praised art Thou and most glorious, O God of our fathers!

Commanded to ascend the mountain of the noetic Sion, O apostle, and having passed over death to divine life, rejoicing, thou dost bestow the cup of salvation of the praised and most glorious God of our fathers, having received it thyself.

The divine Water of life showed thee forth, O blessed one, as a noetic river which drieth up rivers of deception with streams of teaching and doth water those who cry: Praised and most glorious art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Though a mortal, O apostle, thou dost supernaturally work wonders, for, undergoing suffering with love, thou didst follow after Christ Who loved thee, chanting: Praised and most glorious is God!

*Theotokion:* O Theotokos, Jacob prophetically understood thee to be a ladder, for through thee the All-exalted One appeared and dwelt among men on earth, as He was well-pleased so to do. Praised and most glorious is the God of our fathers!

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos: \[same as that of the preceding canon\]*

O apostle of Christ, the fire of the Holy Spirit, descending from on high, commanded thee to proclaim His mighty works upon the ends of the earth in new languages which thou hadst never spoken before.

The proclamation which ye trumpeted forth to the earth doth astound every mind, O initiates of the mysteries of Christ and beholders of lofty things, for as the twelve ye have enlightened the darkness of the earth.

O Master Christ, wondrous was Thy grace in Thy divinely wise disciples who, as simple and humble men, traversed the whole earth from one end thereof even unto all its ends.

Who instructed thee to speak thus, O apostle? Who enlightened thy mind to behold clearly the effulgence of the unapproachable glory which shineth forth the light of truth in our hearts?

*Glory..., Triadicon:* Let us hymn the Trinity, O ye faithful, glorifying the unoriginate Father, and the Son, and the upright Spirit, the single Essence; and let us chant threefold hymns unto It, singing: Holy, holy, holy art Thou forever! Amen.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* O Christ, we glorify Thee as One of the Trinity, for, incarnate of the Virgin without change, Thou didst bear all things as a man without departing from the Father’s essence, O Jesus, even though Thou wast united unto us.

*Katavasia:* The children raised together in piety, disdaining the ungodly command, feared not the threat of the fire, but, standing in the midst of the flame, they chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* Him of Whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven stand in awe as their Creator and Lord, hymn, ye priests; glorify, ye children; bless, ye people, and exalt supremely for all ages!

In godly manner was the Incorporeal One incarnate of thee, O all-pure one. Him do thou entreat to slay the passions of my soul and enliven it, for of old it was slain by most wicked sins.

In giving birth unto our Savior and God, thou didst remedy the affliction of Adam, who was fashioned of dust. Him do thou beseech to heal the wounds of my soul, which is incurably afflicted.

Raise me up who lie in the depths of evil, and vanquish now the enemies who war against me. Disdain not my soul which hath been wounded with wicked passions, O pure one, but take pity and save me.

O pure one, who gavest birth unto the Physician of all, heal thou the suffering of my heart, and beseech Christ to show me forth as one who hath a share in the portion of the righteous, O Virgin.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* The children of Israel in the furnace, shining more brightly than gold in a crucible in the beauty of their piety, said: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

O Andrew, apostle of Christ, thy divine memory doth shine forth radiant and gladdening rays of healing upon us who cry out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Possessed of human nature, thou didst transcend the laws thereof and didst pass on to the habitations of the angels, O apostle Andrew; and thou dost cry out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The inspiration of the Spirit of God, which before illumined thee with fire from on high, O divinely eloquent apostle, doth show thee to be a zealous orator who crieth out to thy Christ: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst flash forth like lightning, a radiant light unto the gentiles, dispelling the darkness of ignorance and illumining the faithful, who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, hymn and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou throne of the glory of God! Rejoice, rampart of the faithful through which hath shone forth Christ, the Light of those who are in darkness, who bless thee and cry out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* God, Who preserved the bush which burnt on Sinai unconsumed and Who delivered the children in the midst of the burning flame, hymn, bless and exalt ye supremely forever!

With a fisherman’s skill thou didst draw fish from the sea, O most wise one, and now, with faith, thou dost draw men from the deception of the enemy for Christ. For deception was once an abyss which drowned the nations in the storm of impiety.

Propelled by the sail of the Spirit, with faith in Christ thou didst navigate the noetic abyss of life without being capsized, O apostle. Wherefore, rejoicing, thou hast attained unto the harbor of life for all ages.

When the noetic Sun set of His own will upon the Tree, the great Andrew, the lamp of the Church, the beacon of the Sun, seeking to end his life with Christ and to set in Him, was suspended upon the wood of a cross.

O disciple and beloved friend of Christ, and one of His apostles: When the Judge sitteth upon His throne with you, His twelve, to render judgment as He hath promised, be ye then for us a rampart of love of mankind.

We bless Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord.

*Triadicon:* Let us glorify the thrice-radiant Unity, the equally-enthroned Trinity, not separating It, but uniting It consubstantially as truly One Essence, united without confusion in three Persons.

*Now & ever…:* *Theotokion:* Having conceived, thou didst give birth unto one of the Trinity, Who, incarnate of thee, doth renew the laws of nature by thy birthgiving, O pure one. Cease not ever to beseech Him as God in our behalf, O Theotokos.

*Katavasia:* The dew-bearing furnace showed forth the image of a supernatural wonder; for it burned not the youths whom it had received, just as the fire of the Godhead burned not the Virgin, whose womb it entered. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Theotokos

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud upon whom the unoriginate Master of all descended from heaven, like the dew upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

Sin-loving, I remain in indifference, O pure one, yet I tremble at the impartial judgment, at which do thou preserve me uncondemned by thy holy prayers, that I may ever bless thee, mine intercessor, O Bride of God.

Having done shameful things on earth, I fear the judgment and the inexorable gaze of thy Son, O Virgin; wherefore, I cry to thee: O most compassionate Mistress, help me, and rescue me from want at that time, and save me, O pure one!

How fearful is the day of judgment, O Maiden! How dreadful is the sentence! How grievous my shame! Who can withstand the rest, O all-pure Mistress? Have mercy on my suffering soul, and grant me remission before the end, O pure one!

O all-immaculate one, who gavest birth unto the divine Light: Illumine me who am benighted by all the assaults of the wicked one and who have angered God with all manner of evils; and lead me to do good works, for thou art the cause of all good things.

Canon I of the Apostle

*Irmos:* The bush, aflame with fire yet unconsumed, showed forth an image of thy pure birthgiving; and now we pray thee to extinguish the furnace of temptations which rageth against us, that we may unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos.

As a most excellent disciple, following even unto death thy Master Who was crucified of His own will upon the Cross, thou didst ascend the heights of thy cross rejoicing, and didst pass on to the heavens, O blessed Andrew.

The gates of Eden were opened unto thee, and the ladder of heaven was set up for thee. The mansions of heaven received thee and thou didst stand, rejoicing, before Christ, the Bestower of life, O apostle, most eminent intercessor for the world.

Thou wast glorified by sufferings like unto those of thy Teacher, O blessed and most wise Andrew; for thou didst receive thine end through a cross and wast deified through communion with God. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Pray thou ever in our behalf.

Rejoice, most excellent pair, having now inherited citizenship in the heavens! Ye have transcended the desire for crowns, having conquered the power thereof, and ye illumine us with the radiance of divine gifts.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst spring forth from the root of David, the prophet and forefather of God, O Virgin; but thou hast glorified David, for thou gavest birth unto the Lord of glory, Whom he prophesied. Hymning Him, we magnify thee as is meet.

Canon II of the Apostle

*Irmos:* The radiant cloud, upon whom the unoriginate Master of all descended like dew upon the fleece, and of whom He was incarnate, becoming man for our sake, let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

O holy one, who spread out the net of the mystic knowledge of God, and who ensnared fish therein with the beauties of heavenly thoughts: Entreat the Holy Trinity to pour forth cleansing upon us.

The nations enlightened by thee and led up from earth to the heavens by thee give thanks, for, wrested from the service of the enemy, they have become companions of the holy angels, partakers of the glory of the Lord.

O ye apostles, witnesses of ineffable things and ministers of the Word, performers of the mysteries and beholders of inscrutable things: Pray ye that we become heirs to the kingdom of Christ and partakers in His divinity.

Having received from Christ the power to bind and to loose, loose ye us all from the bonds of our many transgressions when Christ shall come and all ye twelve will be seated upon thrones to judge all the tribes of Israel.

*Glory..., Triadicon:* Unceasingly we glorify in heaven and on earth the incomprehensible Trinity, the tri-hypostatic Essence, the indivisible Glory which is hymned in one Godhead, piously worshipping the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

*Now and ever…: Theotokion:* We flee with faith to thy loving-kindness, piously worshipping thy Son, O Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou entreat as the God and Lord of the world, that He deliver us from corruption, misfortune and every temptation.

*Katavasia:* A strange and most glorious mystery do I behold: the cave is heaven; the Virgin, the throne of the cherubim; the manger, the place wherein lay Christ God, Whom naught can contain, Whom praising, we magnify.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary...”—

Finding thee, the Word Who is wholly without beginning showed thee forth as the first-called of all the apostles, O most blessed and ever-memorable Andrew; and having followed in His steps, thou didst show thyself to be a guide for those who are astray, leading them to the divine and heavenly path.

Glory…: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Most gloriously let us praise the apostle Andrew, the brother of Peter, the first of all the disciples, the beholder and servant of Him Who is the Word, for he enlighteneth the nations and, crucified, met his end as a disciple of the Master.

Now and ever…: Theotokion—

O all-immaculate Virgin, with Andrew the first-called entreat God, to Whom thou didst give birth, in behalf of all who piously honor thee, that we receive the splendor of thy Son and a place to stand with the elect and the saints; for what thou dost wish, thou canst do.

On the Praises, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven...”—

Be glad now, O Bethsaida, for the most fragrant lilies, Peter and Andrew, have blossomed forth in thee from the vale of their mother, perfuming the whole world with the preaching of the Faith through the grace of Christ; and they have shared also in His sufferings.

Rejoice and make merry, O Andrew, for, clearly, in the radiance of the Word, thou hast received Christ, the Sun of glory, the Bestower of life, to Whom cleaving with faith, thou didst preach. Him do thou unceasingly entreat in behalf of us who hymn thee with faith.

Andrew, the beholder of God, the teacher of the mysteries of the divine dispensation of Christ, elect among the first to be disciples of the Word, beholding Peter, his brother, crying aloud, did say: “We have found the Messiah, Whom the Scriptures and the prophets foretold!”

Thankfully honoring thee, the city of Patras hath acquired thee as its pastor, a divine protector, and a deliverer from all manner of misfortunes, and its preserver. Unceasingly pray thou for it, that it be preserved unharmed.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he hath drawn men forth from the abyss, using the Cross instead of a rod; and lowering a line of power, he leadeth up souls from the deception of the enemy, and doth ever offer them to God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, among the choirs of the disciples of Christ, that he may pray with them, that Christ be merciful unto us on the day of Judgment.

Now & ever..., of the forefeast, in the same tone—

Receive thou, O Bethlehem, the Mother of God, for the unapproachable Light cometh to be born in thee. Ye angels, marvel in heaven. Ye men, give glory on earth. Ye magi from Persia, bring ye your most glorious threefold gifts. Ye shepherds abiding in the fields, chant ye the thrice-holy hymn. Let every breath praise the Maker of all!

Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the apostle, and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II of the apostle.

Prokimenon, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Epistle to the Corinthians, §131 \(I Cor. 4:9-16\)

Brethren: God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to John, §4 \(Jn1:35-51\)

At that time, John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking upon Jesus as He walked, he saith: “Behold the Lamb of God!” And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them: “What seek ye?” They said unto Him: “Rabbi,” \(which is to say, being interpreted, Master,\) “where dwellest Thou?” He saith unto them: “Come and see.” They came and saw where He dwelt, and abode with Him that day: for it was about the tenth hour. One of the two which heard John speak, and followed Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him: “We have found the Messiah!”, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said: “Thou art Simon the son of Jonah: thou shalt be called Cephas,” which is by interpretation, A stone. The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him: “Follow Me.” Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him: “We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” And Nathanael said unto him: “Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?” Philip saith unto him: “Come and see.” Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him, and saith of him: “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!” Nathanael saith unto Him: “Whence knowest thou me?” Jesus answered and said unto him: “Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.” Nathanael answered and saith unto him: “Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.” Jesus answered and said unto him: ­“Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these.” And He saith unto him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.”

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

