Also on THE 1ST DAY of the MONTH OF AUGUST

FEAST OF THE MOST MERCIFUL SAVIOR & THE ALL-HOLY THEOTOKOS

AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the Man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 4 to the Savior, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

We all-radiantly honor Thy city, O most merciful Lord, celebrating with gladness Thy festivity. For Thou hast taught us divinely by the choir of the apostles; and we, looking to Thee with fear and joy, ask for ineffable food. For Thou Thyself art the Sustenance of life, Who camest down from the heavens, O omnipotent Jesus, Savior of our souls. *\(twice\)*

Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou didst dwell with Thy disciples, in that Thou hast great mercy. For Thou art the Bread of life, of which the world partakest. The food remainest for us inexhaustible, and by partaking thereof mankind is given life unto incorruption, casting off the evil of death, O omnipotent Jesus, Savior of our souls.

We, the faithful, praise Thy festival, O most merciful Christ, for Thou didst come from the Father to save us. Wherefore, we hymn Thee with songs of thanksgiving, for as God Thou hast laid bare for us Thy divine power, working an all-glorious wonder unto the salvation of us who do good. Therefore, O Kind-hearted One, we glorify Thy dispensation, O omnipotent Jesus, Savior of our souls.

And 4 stichera of the Cross, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Today the godly multitude of the faithful rejoiceth, for the heavenly Cross appeareth unto the ends of the world, illumining the firmament with unapproachable light, maketh the air brilliant and adorneth the face of the earth. And the Church of Christ hymneth it in divine songs, worshipping it with veneration, and the divine and all-wondrous Cross preserveth it from on high. By its power are we strengthened; wherefore, let us approach the Master, saying: Grant peace to the world and enlighten our souls! *Twice*

Let creation leap up and rejoice, for the Cross hath shone forth today from heaven, illumining those on earth, and hath shown those who have been scattered to be unified. Today the angelic choirs join chorus with men, for the rampart of resistance hath been destroyed by the Cross, which hath manifestly united all into one. Wherefore, shining forth more brightly than the sun, it illumineth all creation with grace, and maketh radiant and saveth those who honor it with faith.

Behold! the divine Cross clearly shineth forth upon the ends of the earth more brightly than the radiance of the sun, desiring to indicate the end of all things as the precious scepter of Christ the King. It hath raised the human race up from hades, sending hell into great captivity, and, casting down the enemy, it hath utterly destroyed the pride of the demons. And now it showeth forth the resurrection of the Savior and saveth those who cry: Grant peace to the world and enlighten our souls!

Glory…: Idiomelon, in the same tone—

Christ, our most merciful Savior, Who was born in the flesh of thy virginal womb, hath shown thee as a life-bearing wellspring unto those who praise thee. Wherefore, cease thou never to pray to Him in behalf of those who hymn and praise thee, making steadfast our homeland by thy supplications and mercy.

Now & ever…, the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone—

To Thy precious Cross, O Christ God, which Moses prefigured in himself of old when he cast down and vanquished Amalek, and of which David the psalmist commanded, saying: “Worship the footstool of His feet,” do we sinners now offer homage today with unworthy lips; and chanting, we entreat Thee Who wast well-pleased to be nailed thereto: O Lord, vouchsafe unto us a place with the thief in Thy kingdom!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from Proverbs

My child, despise not the chastening of the Lord; nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him: for whom the Lord loveth, He rebuketh, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more valuable than precious stones: no evil thing shall resist her: she is well known to all that approach her, and no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth proceedeth righteousness, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Her ways are good ways, and all her paths are peaceful. She is the tree of life to all that lay hold upon her; and she is a secure help to all that stay themselves on her, as on the Lord.

A Reading from the Prophecy of Isaiah

Thus saith the Lord: Thy gates shall be opened continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring in to thee the power of the gentiles, and their kings as captives. For the nations and the kings which will not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be made utterly desolate. And the glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, in the cypress, and pine, and cedar together, to glorify My holy place, and I shall glorify the place of my feet. And the sons of those who afflicted thee, and of those who provoked thee, shall come to thee in fear; and thou shalt be called Sion, the city of the Holy One of Israel. Because thou hast become desolate and hated, and there was no helper, therefore I will make thee a perpetual gladness, a joy of many generations. And thou shalt suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt eat the wealth of kings; and shalt know that I am the Lord Who saveth thee and delivereth thee, the God of Israel.

A Reading from Proverbs

Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding she saith: “Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge. He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of saints is understanding: for to know the law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.”

At Litia, these stichera idiomela, the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone I—

Today the holy words of David have received their fulfillment; for, lo! we manifestly worship the footstool of Thine all-pure feet, O most Compassionate One, and cry out to Thee, placing our trust in the shelter of Thy wings: Let the light of Thy countenance be shined upon us! Exalt Thou the horn of Thine Orthodox people through the elevation of Thy Cross, O greatly merciful Christ!

Elevated today, the Tree of life, which was planted in the place of the skull, whereon the preëternal King wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, sanctifieth the ends of the earth; and the temple of the Resurrection is renewed. The angels rejoice in heaven, and men make merry on earth, crying like David and saying: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, for it is holy, granting great mercy to the world!

Prefiguring Thy Cross, O Christ, in giving his blessing to his grandsons, the Patriarch Jacob crossed his hands over their heads. And raising it aloft today, O Savior, we cry out: Grant victory to all Orthodox Christians over their adversaries, as Thou gavest the victory to Constantine.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone V—

Beholding Thee, the Creator and Fashioner of all, hanging naked upon the Cross, all creation was moved by fear and lamented; the sun darkened its light; the earth quaked and the stones split asunder; the splendor of the temple was rent in twain; the dead arose from the graves; and the angelic hosts were filled with awe, saying: “O the wonder! The Judge is judged and suffereth, desiring the salvation and restoration of the world!”

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone V—

*Automelon:* Rejoice, O Life-bearing Cross, ­invincible victory of piety, gate of paradise, confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been destroyed and abolished, the power of death hath been trampled down, and we have been raised up from earth to the heavens, O invincible weapon, opponent of the demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, which grantest the world great mercy.

*Stichos:* Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, for it is holy.

*Prosomia:* Rejoice, thou Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been released from the curse, thou ensign of joy, who in thine exaltation driveth away the enemy, O most honored one, our helper, dominion of kings, might of the righteous, splendor of priests, who, when traced, doth deliver from evils, staff of power, whereby we are shepherded, weapon of peace around whom the angels stand in fear, divine glory of Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages; He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Rejoice, thou guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the dead, who hast lifted us up who have fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, whereby the curse hath been annulled and incorruption hath budded forth, and we mortals have been deified, and the devil hath been utterly cast down! Beholding thee today uplifted in the arms of the hierarch, we exalt Him Who was lifted up upon thee, and we bow down before thee, richly drawing forth great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou didst dwell with Thy disciples, in that Thou art most merciful, for Thou art the Bread of life of which the world partaketh, and Thou remainest for us inexhaustible food which, when eaten, enliveneth mankind unto incorruption, doing away with the evil of death, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

O God, the words of Moses Thy prophet have been fulfilled, who said: “Ye shall see your life hanging before your eyes!” Today the Cross is exalted, and the world is freed from deception. Today the resurrection of Christ is renewed, and the ends of the earth rejoice, offering to Thee a hymn on cymbals, like David, and saying: “Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, O God: the Cross and resurrection! For their sake Thou hast saved us, O Good One Who lovest mankind! O Almighty Lord, glory be to Thee!”

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

Looking down from on high and receiving the poor, O most merciful Master, visit us who are afflicted by sins, and through the supplications of the Theotokos grant great mercy to our souls.

Glory…: Another troparion, in Tone IV—

O most merciful Savior, Thou sun-like Luminary: through the light of Thine effulgence grant us discourse, that with a pure conscience we may sing praises on Thy feast all-divine, glorifying Thee, the only-begotten Son, and the consubstantial Spirit; for Thou givest us peace and great mercy.

Now & ever…: Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I—

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victory unto Orthodox Christians over their adversaries, preserving Thy community by Thy Cross.

AT MATINS

On “God is the Lord…”: the first troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, the second troparion of the feast; Now & ever…, the troparion of the Cross.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted, O Christ our Lord, than the foundations of death were shaken. That which hades swallowed greedily it spewed forth, trembling. Thou hast revealed to us Thy salvation, O Holy One, and we glorify Thee. O Son of God, have mercy upon us!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VI—

Today the words of the prophet have been fulfilled! For, behold! we bow down before the place where Thy feet stood, O Lord, and, receiving the Tree of salvation, we have achieved liberation from sinful passions through the supplications of the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Glory…, Now & ever: The foregoing is repeated.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We magnify Thee, O Christ, Bestower of life, and we honor Thy holy Cross, whereby Thou hast saved us from slavery to the enemy.

Selected Psalm verses—

A Judge them, O God, that do me injustice; war against those who war against me. \[Ps. 34: 1\]

B Take hold of weapon and shield, and arise unto my help. \[Ps. 34: 2\]

A The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed upon us. \[Ps. 4: 7\]

B As with a shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us. \[Ps. 5: 13\]

A Thou hast given a sign unto those who fear Thee, that they may flee from before the face of thy bow. \[Ps. 59: 6\]

B That we may know upon the earth Thy way, among the nations Thy salvation. \[Ps. 66: 3\]

A All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. \[Ps. 97: 3\]

B Let us worship at the place where His feet have stood. \[Ps. 131: 7\]

A Then shall all the trees of the forest rejoice. \[Ps. 95: 12\]

B God is our king before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. \[Ps. 73: 12\]

A Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; for it is holy. \[Ps. 98: 5\]

B Let God, our God, bless us; let God bless us. \[Ps. 66: 7-8\]

A Save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance. \[Ps. 27: 9\]

B Shepherd them and bear them up unto eternity. \[Ps. 27: 9\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, our God. *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Of old, in paradise, a tree stripped me naked, the enemy bringing about mortality through eating; but the tree of the Cross, bearing for men the vesture of life, hath been planted in the ground, and the whole world hath been filled with all manner of joy. Beholding it uplifted, O ye people, let us cry out to God together: Fill Thou Thy house with glory!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

*Stichos:* O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous things.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to St. John, §42

from the midpoint \[Jn 12:28-36\]

The Lord said: “Father, glorify Thy name.” Then came there a voice from heaven, saying: “I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.” The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said: “An angel spake to Him.” Jesus answered and said: “This voice came not because of Me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto Me.” This He said, signifying what death He should die. The people answered Him: “We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest Thou, ‘The Son of man must be lifted up?’ Who is this Son of man?” Then Jesus said unto them: “Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.”

Then, “Having beheld the resurrection of Christ…”

And after Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O Cross of Christ, hope of Christians, guide of the lost, haven of the tempest-tossed, victory amid battles, confirmation of the whole world, physician of the ill, resurrection of the dead: Have mercy upon us!

The canon of the feast, with 8 troparia, the irmos being chanted twice; and the canon of the precious Cross, with 6 troparia.

Ode I

The canon of the most merciful Savior

& the all-pure Theotokos, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Thou didst bring the sea together, engulfing proud Pharaoh and his arms, and didst save the people dryshod, O Lord; and Thou didst lead them to the mountain of holiness, and they cried: We sing unto Thee, our God, a hymn of victory, for Thou hast been glorified!

To the Savior

Come, ye faithful, and, blessing with praises and hymns the radiant Church which hath shone forth upon those who hold fast to piety, let us glorify therein Christ, our most merciful God, crying: We hymn Thee, our God, for Thou hast been glorified!

Let the mind of all the faithful be uplifted to heaven, unto Him Who sitteth on high, and, joining chorus with faith in His all-divine church, let us honor the divine festival of Him Who hath humbled those on earth and those of heaven.

Of the Theotokos

Thy womb, O Theotokos, was a divinely inscribed tablet whereon was graven the Word of the Father, to Whom thou hast for us physically given birth. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us from all want and sorrow.

Isaiah, the foremost of the prophets, rejoiceth splendidly in thee, O Virgin, and, beholding thy birthgiving which was accomplished without the aid of man, he prophesieth: Having given birth for us to the Word of the Father, thou hast remained a virgin even after giving birth.

Canon of the Cross, the acrostic whereof is: “I bow down before the Cross, the salvation of the faithful”, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

I bow down before the Cross, the salvation of the faithful, and I kiss it fervently and embrace it, crying out: O most blessed Tree of Christ, illumine my soul and mind, I pray!

Today the sign of the Cross hath shown itself to be victorious over the passions and the demons. Wherefore, O ye faithful, radiantly illumined in soul, let us all kiss it now.

The precious Cross emitteth brilliant rays and illumineth those who bow down before it with faith today, sanctifying our souls and bodies.

Lying visible before us, the life-giving Cross sendeth forth brilliant rays of grace. Offering praise unto the Lord, let us approach and receive enlightenment, gladness, salvation and remission.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy Virgin who gavest birth in the flesh unto Christ Who of His own will suffered for our sake on the Cross: by thine entreaties save those who bless thee with honor.

Katavasia: The irmoi of the canon of the Exaltation of the Cross.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* My heart is established in the Lord; my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies. I am glad in Thy salvation.

*Of the Savior*

All the angelic captains join chorus with us today, surrounding Thy Holy Church, O Master, not physically, but spiritually. And do Thou grant us Thy peace from on high, in that Thou art most merciful.

The choir of the prophets and that of the apostles and all the choirs of the martyrs, O Savior, join chorus with us today, gazing in spirit upon Thee, the God of many names, Who art glorified by the faithful.

Of the Theotokos

By David thou wast called the rich mountain, O Virgin, who received in thy womb the timeless Word of the Father Who became a little babe, and who gavest birth in the flesh unto the hypostatic Wisdom of God.

The noetic tyrant was crushed, dealt an incurable wound by the heavenly Stone, Christ our God, Who issued forth from thy womb and joined those on earth to those in heaven.

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Of old, a sword was set to guard the blessed tree of life after the disobedience of Adam the first-created; but the Cross hath opened a path thereto.

With eyes, mouth and soul, with our faces and hearts, let us all bow down before the all-holy Cross of Christ, the Bestower of life, whereby the whole world is sanctified.

Becoming temples of God today, as the prophets said, bowing down before the wood of the all-holy Cross, all of us who are the heirs thereto kiss it with fear.

We chant hymns to thee, O Christ, and with faith entreat thy power: Rescue us from the snares of the enemy, and direct all of us who hymn thee to the haven of salvation.

*Theotokion:* As a virgin thou gavest birth to the Son Who before thee was begotten of God the Father without mother before time began, and hath been crucified in the flesh, that He might save those who had sinned before.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

I have become a committer of every abomination, O most merciful Savior, and have fallen into the pit of despair; yet do I groan from the depths of my heart and cry unto Thee, O Word: Haste Thou, O Compassionate One, and speed Thou to our aid, in that Thou art merciful!

*Ikos:* Having Thee, O most merciful Savior, as a mighty confirmation, and Thine all-pure Mother as an indestructible rampart and calm haven, we never fear the assaults of the enemy; for, shielded by Thine invisible providence and protection, we vanquish foes, visible and invisible. And possessing Thine all-pure Mother as our helper, we elude the snares of the enemy as though they were spiders’ webs; and we joyfully chant hymns of surpassing joy: Haste Thou, O Compassionate One, and speed Thou to our aid, in that Thou art merciful!

Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV—

O most Merciful One, we pray, falling down with contrite heart: Send speedy, steadfast and mighty consolation unto us, that we may send up to Thee the thrice holy hymn with a voice of praise. O Savior of the whole world, Thou art the God of the penitent!

Glory…, Now & ever…, sessional hymn of the Cross, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded…”—

Of old, Joshua, the son of Nun, mystically prefigured the image of the Cross when he stretched forth his arms in the form of the Cross, O my Savior; and the sun stood still until he had cast down all the enemy which was opposed to Thee, O God. And now Thou hast raised with Thee the whole world, which saw Thee affixed to the Cross, destroying the might of death.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk foresaw Thy coming, O Lord; wherefore he cried aloud: “God shall come out of Thæman!” Glory to Thy power! Glory to Thy condescension!

Of the Savior

The six-winged and many-eyed cherubim, standing before Thy throne, O merciful Master, render glory. Send them unto us, the faithful, and sanctify Thy divine Church and those who cry: Glory to Thy power! Glory, O Christ, to Thy condescension!

David was exalted, O Savior, and, shining forth through Thy divine Spirit, he proclaimed Thy nativity from the Virgin. As Thou art most merciful, exalt and raise on high Thy holy and divine Church.

Of the Theotokos

The bow of the mighty prince of this world was broken by thy pregnancy, O Mistress; for thou didst splendidly provide flesh for the divine Incarnation, a lure for the Word of the Father wherewith He might hook the enemy of our first parents. Wherefore, we cry unto Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Like David thou wast exalted, O Virgin, and by the voices of the prophets thou wast revealed as the rich mountain of God. And unto Christ God, the Stone which was quarried from thy womb, we chant: Glory to Thy power! Glory, O Christ, to Thy condescension!

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Let the whole earth drop forth joy, and let the trees of the forest be glad, deified today by the most precious Cross which illumineth the ends of the world.

O all-glorious Cross, who wast intended to be an instrument of execution, but becamest an invincible weapon of victory bearing life into the world: ­illumine our hearts!

O most honored Cross, thou art the divine triumph, thou art the accomplishment of our salvation, thou art the victory of the faithful and the divine oblation: Sanctify those who hymn thee!

With all the earth is heaven gladdened. The passion-bearers, martyrs and apostles, and the souls of the righteous now joyfully rejoice, and the life-imparting Tree, which lieth visibly in our midst, saveth all and sanctifieth the faithful with grace.

*Theotokion:* Truly hast thou appeared! Truly didst thou give birth to the Most High as thy Son, Who stretched forth His hands upon the Cross and beckoned the world to Him, O Virgin Mother Mary.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Grant us peace, O Lord our God. O Lord our God, take us for Thy possession. O Lord, we know none other than Thee; we call upon Thy name.

Of the Savior

The all-divine name of Thee—the Father, the Word and the Spirit—reigneth forever. As Thou art merciful, send forth from on high a peaceful life unto those who love Thee.

As the Creator of the ages, in Thy dispensation Thou didst draw nigh unto the flesh, that, having deified the flesh, thou mightest lead it up to the Father and Thy desire.

To the Theotokos

O Mary who knewest not wedlock, we, the faithful, who through the fruit \[of the tree\] came to fall headlong, have understood thee to be the table of the Word of life; and we been brought to the noetic light by the Fruit of thy womb.

The voices of the prophets shine forth, emitting all-radiant beams like the sun, proclaiming beforehand thy birthgiving which was without man, O Virgin. Thus was the will of the Father, and the Son by His own desire became a babe in thy womb through the action of the Spirit; and Thou remainest a virgin.

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

With joy let us uplift the all-blessed Cross which is set forth in the churches and cities, and let us bow down before it, that we may receive remission of our debts.

The wicked serpent, the prince of darkness, is now slain, unable to bear the radiance which the life-bearing Cross emitteth, the precious scepter of the divine King.

Like a most brilliant star, like a magnificent pearl and the all-radiant sun doth the Cross of the Lord, which we venerate, illumine all the ends of the earth.

Lift up your voices in jubilation, ye nations! Leap up, ye tribes, and chant unto God Who hath given us the indestructible confirmation of the Cross, which He now setteth before us! Rejoice, all ye faithful, receiving good things for its sake!

*Theotokion:* Knowing thee to be the origin of salvation, O pure one, all the faithful bless thee; for thou gavest birth in the flesh to Him Who existed from the beginning, and by His own will was nailed to the Cross.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Like the waters of the sea am I tossed about by the waves of life, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, like Jonah I cry to Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord!

Of the Savior

The city of great renown keepeth glad festival today, and the Christian people ask of Thee great gifts from on high, O Savior. In that Thou art good and most merciful, preserve Thou Thy flock.

O Christ our Savior, send down mighty confirmation upon those who know Thee to be the mighty and most merciful God, and in that Thou art omnipotent make steadfast the Christian Church.

Of the Theotokos

Deliver me from evils, O Virgin, entreating the Vanquisher of the wicked enemy; and vouchsafe that I may be worthy to stand at the right hand of thy Son.

Having given birth unto God, O Mistress, thou hast deified me and called my mortal essence from death to life, that the curse of my transgression may be annulled through the divine love of Him Who blesseth thee.

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Seeing the Cross set forth today as a divine vessel, as a radiant lamp in churches, temples and cities, we hymn the One Who hath caused it to shine.

Death is slain, corruption is put to death, and the hordes of the demons, unable to endure its touch, flee, beholding the victorious and awesome Cross of Christ set forth today.

Hymning Thee, God the King and Lord, in that Thou hast given us the Cross as an impregnable bulwark, we now kiss it with joy and thus escape evils.

*Theotokion:* Our first mother in Eden was poisoned by absorbing the serpent’s venom; but the Virgin, having given birth to the Author of life, hath poured forth incorruption and resurrection upon the world.

Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV: Automelon—

O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly on the Cross, bestow Thy compassions upon the new community called after Thee, O Christ God; gladden by Thy power Orthodox Christians, granting them victory over all adversaries. May they have as an ally the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace.

*Ikos:* He who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he to the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace!

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The Chaldæan furnace, burning with fire, was bedewed by the Spirit through the presence of God; and the children chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Of the Savior

Thou art the Creator of the vault of heaven, O Lord, and, knowing Thee to be most merciful, we fall down before Thee, crying aloud: Haste Thou, O Compassionate One, and speed Thou to the help of us who chant like the youths: Blessed is the God of our Fathers!

With loving-kindness Thou hast opened unto us the door of ineffable food, O most merciful Savior; disclose now Thy divine gifts from on high unto those who with faith cry to Thee: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Triadicon:* We glorify the Father, the Son and the Spirit in one Godhead—the Essence in three Hypostases, the indivisible Substance, uncreated, unoriginate and transubstantial.

*Theotokion:* The youths who, cooled by the fire of the Godhead, were not consumed by the fiery furnace, prefigured thine unconsumed womb. And receiving the Word of God, thou gavest birth unto Him for those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldeans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

O ye faithful, let us bow down before the saving Tree, the all-holy Cross, which all the armies of the angels serve, beholding it displayed, pouring forth sanctification and life upon us.

The all-holy Cross of Christ, the Bestower of life, hath been shown to be victorious, from on high driving away a multitude of the demons and the audacity of the barbarians, and showing our Orthodox hierarchs forth as conquerors of all heresies.

We hymn, glorify, magnify and bow down before Thy might, O Christ, for Thou hast given Thy divine Cross to us, Thy servants, as inexhaustible sweetness and a guardian for our souls and bodies.

*Theotokion:* The furnace did not consume the three youths, prefiguring thy birthgiving; for the divine Fire, dwelling within thee, did not consume thee, teaching all to chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O ye angels and heavens, bless, hymn and exalt supremely Him Who sitteth upon the throne of glory and as God is glorified unceasingly forever!

Of the Savior

Through the supplications of our forefathers preserve Thou our land, O Word, in that Thou art most merciful, and by Thy mighty power grant us strength and power in abundance against the adversary, that we may cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Offering Thee divine hymnody in Thine all-pure church, O most Merciful One, Thy chosen people praise Thee. And as Thou art most merciful, overshadow us with Thy heavenly power, that we may cry unto Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Of the Theotokos

O pure Virgin, Who produced the unploughed divine Grain of life and gavest birth within time unto the timeless Word of the Father, the Effulgence of the threefold Godhead: as thou art His Mother, pray to Him for us who hymn thee.

He Who did not leave the bosom of the unoriginate Father made His abode within the womb of the Virgin and was born in the flesh, cleansing my flesh and my fallen soul. Unto Him do we chant: Bless, praise and exalt Him ­supremely forever!

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* Fall back in awe and fear, O heaven; and let the foundations of the earth be shaken! For, lo! He Who dwelleth in the highest is numbered among the dead and sojourneth as a stranger in a small tomb. Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him ­supremely for all ages!

Prefiguring Thy Cross, Jacob once laid his arms cross-wise over his grandsons, blessing them and teaching grace among the nations. Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt God ­supremely forever!

O Thine ineffable condescension and Thine indescribable good things, O Christ! Thou becamest incarnate, and, being crucified and accepting death, didst decide to release man from the curse, pouring forth incorruption upon the thrice-blessed Tree, this all-glorious Cross, forever.

Let us praise today the all-holy Cross of the Lord, the divine victory, the origin of life, the destroyer of falsehood, the annihilator of the demons, the repeller of barbarians, the protector and champion of kings.

*Theotokion:* Beholding Christ pierced with nails, His incorrupt side run through with a spear, beaten about the head with a reed, and given gall to eat, the Virgin cried aloud: “Whither hath Thy beauty gone, O all-comely Word, more glorious than all the children of men?”

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Foreign to mothers is virginity, and strange is childbirth to virgins; yet both were accomplished in thee, O Theotokos. Wherefore, all of us, the peoples of the world, magnify thee unceasingly.

Of the Savior

The divine choirs—monks and layfolk and the assemblies of the clergy—sensibly praise Thee today in Thine all-wondrous church, O Master. As Thou art merciful, save us, that all of us, the peoples of the earth, may magnify Thee unceasingly.

Today we, the faithful, offer up hymnody to Thee, O Christ of many names, the God of all; and spiritually celebrating Thy festival, O most Merciful One, we ask of Thee that Thou make our homeland immovably steadfast.

Of the Theotokos

Thou hast been shown to be the Mother of Emmanuel, God and man, the Word of the unoriginate Father, O Virgin. Look down upon the dominion which calleth upon thee, and make it steadfast, routing the enemy on the day of battle.

Remove corrupt matter from my mind, O Virgin who gavest birth in the flesh to the Word of the Father; enlighten the deep darkness of mine ignorance; and vouchsafe that I may come to the serenity of the divine will on noetic wings.

Canon of the Cross

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Through disobedience we became corrupt, being shown to be violators of the commandment of God; wherefore, death came upon men. For this cause immortality hath blossomed forth today: the victorious Cross of Christ, which we venerate.

Lo! the all-holy Tree hath appeared: the mighty hope of the faithful, the deliverance from the curse; and it setteth joy before men, denouncing the prince of darkness. O ye faithful, let us bow down before it with gladness.

The desired Tree, the invincible weapon, the origin of blessing, the confirmation and bulwark of Christians, the steadfast aid, the deliverance from the curse, hath appeared to us; and it hath illumined and sanctified us who bow down before it.

*Theotokion:* O temple and portal of sanctity, O throne of God, cloud and most radiant lamp, O most immaculate one, thou ark of grace: protect and preserve those who offer veneration to the precious image of thine only-begotten Son.

Exapostilarion of the Savior: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

O Christ, Thou never-waning Light, illumine us with the radiance of Thy countenance, and through the supplications of the Theotokos who gave Thee birth, vouchsafe unto us the splendor of the saints, when Thou shalt sit to render unto each according to his deeds.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the Cross—

The Cross is the guardian of the whole world! The Cross is the beauty of the Church! The Cross is the dominion of kings! The Cross is the confirmation of the faithful! The Cross is the glory of the angels and the wounding of the demons!

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

We honor Thy \[heavenly\] city, O most merciful Lord, celebrating Thy festival with gladness, for Thou hast divinely taught us through the choir of the apostles; and lifting our eyes unto Thee with fear and joy, we beg for ineffable food, for Thou Thyself art the living food come down from heaven, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls. *Twice*

Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou didst dwell with Thy disciples in that Thou art most merciful, for Thou art the Bread of life of which the world partaketh, and Thou remainest for us inexhaustible food which, when partaken of, enliveneth mankind unto incorruption, doing away with the evil of death, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

O most merciful Christ, we, the faithful, sing the praises of Thy festival, for Thou didst come from the Father to save us. Wherefore, we hymn Thee with songs of thanksgiving, for as God Thou hast revealed Thy divine power, all-gloriously working a miracle for the salvation of us who do good. Therefore, we glorify Thy dispensation, O Merciful One, O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

And 3 stichera of the Cross, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

The precious Cross maketh the paths of heaven ready for all to cross who bow down before it with steadfast faith; and He Who was nailed thereto joineth those who hymn it with love to the choirs of the immaterial hosts.

Bowing down with faith before the precious Cross, we hymn the Master Who was crucified thereon, purifying our lips and souls at His behest; and, praising Him, we are illumined with its noetic radiance.

Sweetening the bitter waters of old, Moses delivered Israel, using an image of the Cross; and we, O ye faithful, mystically and divinely tracing its image in our hearts, are ever saved by its might.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the Cross, in Tone IV—

O Lord Who enabled the meek David to conquer the Philistine, ally Thyself also with our pious Orthodox hierarchs and enable them to bring down all proponents of heresy and schism with the weapon of the Cross. O Compassionate One, show forth upon us Thine ancient mercies, that they may truly know that Thou art God, and that we who set our hope on Thee may triumph, entreating Thine all-pure Mother, as is our wont, that we be granted great mercy.

Great Doxology. Veneration of the precious Cross. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III of the canon of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the Cross.

Prokimenon, in Tone VI—

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance.

*Stichos:* Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me.

Epistle to the Corinthians, § 125

\[I Cor. 1: 18-24\]

Brethren: The preaching of the cross is to those who perish, foolishness; but unto us who are saved, it is the power of God. For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast purchased from the beginning.

*Stichos:* God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Gospel according to John, §60

\[Jn. 19: 6-11, 13-20, 25-28, 30-35\]

At that time, the high priests and elders took council against Jesus to put Him to death. And they delivered Him to Pilate saying: “Away with Him! away with Him! Crucify Him!” Pilate said unto them: “Take ye Him, and crucify Him: for I find no fault in Him. The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and by our law He ought to die, because He made Himself the Son of God.” When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; and went again into the judgement hall, and said unto Jesus: “Whence art Thou?” But Jesus gave him no answer. Then said Pilate unto Him: “Speakest Thou not unto me? Knowest Thou not that I have power to crucify Thee, and have power to release Thee?” Jesus answered: “Thou couldst have no power at all against Me, except it were given thee from above.” When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgement seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he said unto the Jews: “Behold your King!” But they cried out: “Away with Him! Away with Him! Crucify Him!” Pilate said unto them: “Shall I crucify your King?” The chief priests answered: “We have no king but Cæsar.” Then delivered he Him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led Him away. And He bearing His Cross went forth into a place called the place of the skull, which is called in Hebrew Golgotha: where they crucified Him, and two others with Him, on either side, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the Cross. And the writing was: “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews”. This title then read many of the Jews; for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus His Mother, and His Mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw His Mother, and the disciple standing by, whom He loved, He said unto His Mother: “Woman, behold thy son!” Then said He to the disciple: “Behold thy Mother!” And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, bowed His head, and gave up the ghost. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day \(for that sabbath day was a high day\), besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. Then came the soldiers, and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead already, they broke not His legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. And he that saw it bore record, and his record is true.

Communion Verse—

The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed upon us.

Be It Known: On this day, in monasteries, cathedrals and parish churches, the Lesser Blessing of Water is performed. This service is set forth at the end of the preceding service, i.e., of the Procession of the Precious Wood of the Precious & Life-creating Cross.

