Also on THE 3RD DAY of the MONTH OF AUGUST

COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER

ANTHONY THE ROMAN

AT LITTLE VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 4 stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel. “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Thou didst follow in the steps of the great and venerable fathers, O father Anthony, and struggling in labors like one of the incorporeal beings while yet in the flesh, thou wast a model of the virtues for many; wherefore, thou wast vouchsafed gifts of miracles by Christ, to cure men of divers ailments. Pray thou that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Thou wast a guide of monastics, O father Anthony, offering thyself first unto God as an unbloody sacrifice through abstinence and love of wisdom, and by the lofty ways of humility and boundless asceticism thou didst put the enemy to shame, O venerable one. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Thy luminous memory hath been shown to be full of joy and gladness, O venerable father Anthony; wherefore, we, thy sacred children, gathering together, spiritually celebrating thy memorial, do glorify the Lord Who hath thus glorified thee.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Today Novgorod the Great rejoiceth, all-­gloriously receiving thee as a sojourner, like a new Abraham; and the blessed community, which hath thy relics within itself, is exceedingly glad: for from Rome thou didst come to Great Novgorod over the waters upon a stone. Wherefore, celebrating thy memorial, they hymn God Who hath given thee to them as an indestructible rampart. And we, thy children, guided by thy precepts, celebrating now thine all-glorious ascension, pray that our souls may be saved.

Now & ever…: Theotokion.

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephrata…”—

Thou hast all-gloriously passed from earthly things to the mansions of heaven, O father, and there hast been vouchsafed the honor of the righteous. With them do thou make supplication, that our souls be saved.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Thou didst mortify the bodily senses through abstinence, O father; wherefore, making a voyage of the waters upon a stone thou didst reach Novgorod the Great, and didst found a monastery therein, and didst lead a multitude of disciples unto Christ.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. In His commandments shall he greatly rejoice.

O venerable one, cause thy flock, who honor thee and celebrate thy repose, to dwell in divine life, exalting their divine love.

Glory…, Now & ever…, idiomelon, in the same tone—

Thou didst raise up an all-honored temple to the Mother of God, as she herself desired, and there thou didst assemble a multitude of disciples to hymn therein the Mistress Theotokos. Entreat her, we pray thee, O venerable Anthony, as thou didst promise, that she not leave us orphaned, but that she deliver thy sacred flock from the snares of the enemy, that with hymns we all may honor thee unceasingly as a solicitous father. And we ask of Christ God, that through thee we may receive great mercy.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Having forsaken Old Rome, thy homeland, thou didst float upon a stone, as upon a light boat, and thereon thou didst traverse the waters supernaturally, like one of the incorporeal ones, guided by the providence of the divine Mind. And thou didst reach Novgorod the Great; and having founded a monastery there, thou didst leave thy body therein as a sanctified gift. Wherefore, we pray thee, O father Anthony: Entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

The mystery hidden from before the ages and unknown even to the angels, through thee, O Theotokos, hath been revealed to those on earth: God incarnate in unconfused union, Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake and, thereby raising up the first-formed man, hath saved our souls from death.

At Great Vespers

After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside…”—

Hating the tumults of the world, O venerable one, thou didst love Christ alone, and taking His Cross upon thy shoulder, thou didst bear it, divinely armed; and didst drown the most wicked serpent in showers of tears. Through abstinence thou didst elude the passions of the flesh, O wise one, and through patience, fasting and frequent prayers didst make thy flesh subject to thy spirit. Through dispassion of soul and purity of mind thou didst acquire from the Lord the struggle of thy labors. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we entreat thee: Beseech the Lord, that our souls find mercy. *Thrice*

O venerable father Anthony, out of love for Christ thou didst forsake all things on earth, and didst embellish thy life with ascetic labors. Through abstinence and tears thou didst purify the eye of thy soul. Thy mind thou didst enlighten with dispassion and didst adorn it with divine humility. Thou didst assemble a multitude of monastics, and by thy teachings, as by a ladder ascending to heaven, didst mount the heights of the virtues. Wherefore, thy children, now standing round about thy shrine, lovingly cry out to thee: Beseech the Lord, O all-blessed one, that our souls find mercy. *Thrice*

O divinely wise father Anthony, thou didst shine forth wondrously from Rome like the sun, and guided by the hand of God thou didst sail the waters on a stone, like one of the incorporeal ones, reaching Novgorod the Great, where thou didst raise up an all-honorable temple to the Mother of God; and therein thou didst assemble multitudes of disciples, to hymn the Mistress Theotokos, and didst found a great monastery, wherein thou didst industriously struggle in fasting and vigils, the endurance of ill treatment and lying on the ground, possessed of purity of soul and body, and the remembrance of death. O our venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved. *Twice*

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

Come, ye multitudes of monastics, and let us offer up today the chanting of psalms and spiritual flowers as to the true adornment of monks and dweller with the venerable; and offering praise, let us say: Rejoice, greatly luminous beacon leading multitudes of monks unto Christ! Rejoice, boast and confirmation of Novgorod the Great, right tranquil haven of all the faithful, and cleansing of those who are sick in sin, who dost elevate them to love divine! Wherefore, standing round about thine all-honored and holy shrine, which even the angels hold in reverence, we kiss it lovingly. O Anthony our venerable father, through thy prayers unto God we ask that we receive God’s love for mankind. Ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Dogmatic theotokion, in the same tone—

In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth and dwelt among men; for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin and came forth from her having received human nature, is the only Son of God, two in nature but not hypostasis. Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, we confess Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, O Mother unwedded, that our souls find mercy!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.

A Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is ­measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.

At Litia, the sticheron of the temple, and these stichera, in Tone VI—

Today thine all-radiant and most festive memorial hath shone forth, O venerable Anthony, truly calling together a vast company of fasters and the choirs of the holy—angels and men—to the praise of our God Who is worshipped in Trinity. Wherefore, hastening with faith to the precious shrine of thy relics, we receive abundant healings, for which cause we entreat thee: Ever grant health of soul unto us who bless thee with faith.

Today we offer thee hymnody of praise on thy memorial, O father. Accept it and approach God in thy supplications, and deliver us from standing on the left hand, but vouchsafe us a place at the right, that we may all worthily bless thee as our fervent helper, O venerable father Anthony.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

A radiant and most festive day hath dawned for us like a second sun, and enlighteneth the councils of all who love the feasts of the Church. The honorable commemoration of the wondrous Anthony driveth away the darkness of primal gloom, calling Novgorod the Great to his precious and wonderworking shrine. Wherefore, venerating it with fear and joy, let us pray to him as to the meek David, that he grant our homeland victory over the enemy, that he ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Theotokos, thou art the true vine which hath budded forth for us the Fruit of life. Beseech Him with the holy apostles, we pray thee, O Mistress, that He have mercy upon our souls.

At the Aposticha, these stichera idiomela, in Tone I—

O venerable father Anthony, assembling with love for thy memorial before thy most precious and wonderworking shrine, holding splendid festival and chanting with voices of song, we say like David: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, for he hath walked blamelessly in the ways of the Lord. Wherefore, dwelling with the venerable, entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Assembling today in memorial, O brethren, let us spiritually honor our venerable father Anthony, who, having laid waste to his body through fasting, caused the passions to wither through abstinence, purified his mind through the keeping of vigils, enlightened his soul with prayer, and through poverty acquired for himself in the heavens a treasure which cannot be stolen. Because of his obedience God hearkened unto him, and through purity he became the dwelling-place of the all-holy Spirit. For his sake Christ hath cast down the arrogance of the enemy, and He granteth us peace and great mercy.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. In His commandments shall He greatly rejoice.

O venerable and divinely blessed Anthony our father, having illumined thy mind with the grace of the Holy Spirit, and enlightened thy heart with the all-splendid rays which emanate from Him, thou truly becamest wholly radiant, and in every way didst vanquish the tempter. Wherefore, thou now joinest chorus with the angels and all the saints in the heavens. Remember us who on earth ever bless thee and honor thine all-holy repose.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

We, the multitudes of the faithful, honor thee as our instructor, O Anthony our father; for by thy steps have we truly learned how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels and companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O unwedded Virgin who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, Mother of God Most High: Accept the entreaties of thy servants, O most immaculate one, granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; and, accepting now our supplications, pray thou that we all be saved.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Having forsaken Old Rome, thy homeland, thou didst float upon a stone, as upon a light boat, and thereon thou didst traverse the waters supernaturally, like one of the incorporeal ones, guided by the providence of the divine Mind. And thou didst reach Novgorod the Great; and having founded a monastery therein, thou didst leave thy body therein as a sanctified gift. Wherefore, we pray thee, O father Anthony: Entreat Christ God, that He save our souls. *Twice*

“Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!…”, once.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the saint, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…: Resurrectional theotokion, in the same tone.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed…”—

Having loved the monastic life from thy youth and followed Christ with all thy soul, O venerable and divinely wise Anthony, and having shone forth hence in thy virtuous life, thou becamest a great model for monks in prayer, fasting and the keeping of vigils. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Glory to Him Who gave thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him Who through thee granteth healing unto all!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O all-holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians, with the hosts on high unceasingly entreat God to Whom thou gavest birth in manner past understanding and recounting, that He grant remission of all our sins and correction of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the ­Wisdom…”—

Casting thy mind from earthly things to the heavenly, through spiritual activity thou didst conceive love for the Lord; and thou didst pass like lightning from the west to the east, just as Habbakuk was borne with food to Babylon. For thou didst reach Novgorod the Great, floating upon a stone as in a boat, guided by the angel of God’s providence. Thou didst raise up an all-wondrous temple to the Mother of God, didst found a great monastery to the glory of Christ God, and didst assemble multitudes of monks. As in this life thou didst care for them like a faithful father, so now, O venerable father Anthony, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Let us hymn the heavenly door and ark, the all-holy mountain, the radiant cloud, the bush unburnt, the noetic paradise, the restoration of Eve, the great treasure of all the world, for salvation for the world was wrought within her and the remission of the ancient transgressions. Wherefore, we cry out to her: Pray to thy Son, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who piously worship thy most holy birthgiving.

Polyeleos, and this magnification—

We bless thee, O venerable father Anthony, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.

Selected Psalm verses—

A With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. \[Ps. 39: 2\]

B He set my feet upon a rock, and He ordered my steps aright. \[Ps. 39: 3\]

A Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness. \[Ps. 54: 8\]

B I am become like a pelican of the wilderness. \[Ps. 101: 7\]

A I have watched, and am like a sparrow that sitteth alone upon the housetop. \[Ps. 101: 8\]

B My knees are grown weak through fasting. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

A And my flesh is changed for want of oil. \[Ps. 108: 24\]

B With tears will I water my couch. \[Ps. 6: 4\]

A For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers hath surrounded me. \[Ps. 21: 17\]

B They have bent their bow, a bitter thing. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

A That they may shoot in secret at the blameless man. \[Ps. 63: 4\]

B I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken. \[Ps. 15: 8\]

A All the nations compassed me round about, and by the name of the Lord I warded them off. \[Ps. 117: 10\]

B Blessed be the Lord Who hath not given us to be a prey to their teeth. \[Ps. 123: 6\]

A Let all Thy works, O Lord, give praise to Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

B And let the righteous ones bless Thee. \[Ps. 144: 10\]

A Know also that the Lord hath made wondrous His righteous one. \[Ps. 4: 4\]

B He hath labored forever, and shall live to the end. \[Ps. 48: 9-10\]

A The Lord preserveth the souls of His saints. \[Ps. 96: 10\]

B The saints shall boast in glory and shall rejoice upon their beds. \[Ps. 149: 5\]

A Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. \[Ps. 115: 6\]

B Chant unto the Lord, O ye saints of His, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness. \[Ps. 29: 5\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

In God doth Novgorod the Great hold festival on thy memorial as is meet, O father Anthony, saved by thy supplications from trials and tribulations and all the threats which beset us. O venerable one, cease thou never to pray to Christ God, that our souls be saved.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Benighted in mind by many transgressions, I, the prodigal, cry out to thy mighty aid, O Theotokos: Enlighten the eyes of my soul, shine upon me a radiant beam of repentance, and clothe me in the armor of light, O pure Virgin Theotokos.

Hymn of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 43

\(Mt. 11: 27-30\)

The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

O venerable father Anthony, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth;­ ­wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed hordes of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.

Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos \[the Paraclysis\], with 6 troparia; and that of the venerable one, with 8 troparia, in Tone II—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Come, ye people, let us chant a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and guided the people whom He had led forth from the bondage of Egypt, for He hath been glorified.

O innocent Lamb, open mine unworthy mouth, make brilliant my tongue, enlighten my heart, and illumine my mind with the light of thy divine knowledge, that I may be able to hymn the memory of the venerable Anthony, whom Thou didst make wondrous on earth.

In Thy great loving-kindness and compassions, O Author of creation and Creator of the ages, accept this hymnody of supplication, and through the entreaties of Thy favored one, the venerable Anthony, grant forgiveness of our transgressions and tranquility to my heart.

Thy radiant and God-pleasing life hath truly been shown forth as light on earth, O Anthony, for thou wast vouchsafed to behold the divine Radiance. Wherefore, having left behind all things visible, thou hast been counted worthy to behold the Unapproachable One.

*Theotokion:* Rend asunder the bonds of my transgressions, O Mistress, praying to thy Son and Lord, and cast down the sin which tormenteth me, O Ever-virgin, that, saved by thee, I may ever hymn thee, O most immaculate one.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Establishing me upon the rock of faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth against mine enemies, for my spirit doth exult when I chant: There is none holy as our God, and none righteous save Thee, O Lord!

Having parted the sea of the passions with the staff of the virtues, and having drowned the prideful foe, like another pharaoh, with thy prayer, thou didst preserve unharmed the chosen flock of the new Israel, O venerable Anthony.

Thou didst love all-night vigils, unceasing prayer and unfeigned love, O blessed one, purifying thy mind and enlightening thy soul therewith; and thou didst humble thy body and didst inure it to daily toils in goodly subjection.

All of us, the faithful, know thee to be a temple of the all-holy Spirit; for thou didst raise up a magnificent temple to the Mother of God, and didst found a great monastery, and didst enlist in it multitudes of monks. Therein is every ailment driven away by thy supplications.

*Theotokion:* Among other women there was never known a mother who was a virgin, nor was any mother vouchsafed to be a virgin after giving birth. But in thee, O Virgin Mother, did both take place. Wherefore, with gladness of spirit I sing: There is none more immaculate than thee, O Mistress!

Kontakion, in Tone II—

Thou didst shine forth from Rome like a star, and having arrived in divinely saved Novgorod the Great, thou didst found a monastery therein. And having erected a church, thou didst summon to it a multitude of monks. With them pray for us who honor thy memory, that we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O venerable father Anthony!

Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Dwelling on earth like an angel, O divinely wise Anthony, thou wast numbered among the choirs of the fasters; for, taking thy cross upon thy shoulder, thou didst follow after Christ the Master; and thou didst cause the soul-destroying passions to wither away, O venerable one, and in spirit becamest a receptacle and vessel pure for the Lord. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thine all-honored and holy memorial.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

As the most immaculate Bride of the Creator, as the Mother of the Deliverer, who knewest not wedlock, as the receptacle of the Comforter, O all-hymned one, haste thou to deliver me from the malice of the demons, who in mind am become their plaything and a dwelling-place of iniquity; and make me a radiant habitation of the virtues. O radiant and incorrupt one, drive away the cloud of the passions, and by thy supplications vouchsafe me the fellowship of the Most High and the never-waning light.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Thou didst come forth from the Virgin, neither a mediator nor an angel, but Thyself incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man; wherefore, I cry to thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Having died to the world, thou didst live an angelic life on earth, O all-glorious Anthony, and didst present thy pure soul to the Master as a hallowed gift; and thou hast worthily received the divine kingdom, O father.

Fleeing the darkness of the passions, thy sails full of the wind of asceticism, and guided to the ways of dispassion, thou didst hasten to the never-waning Light; and illumined thereby, thou hast inherited the riches of incorruption, O venerable Anthony.

Great Novgorod now adorneth itself with gladness, O venerable father Anthony, having thy relics within it; and thy disciples, emulating thy life, rejoice in thy memory, chanting to the Lord: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

*Theotokion:* Divers images bear witness unto thee as the true tabernacle, manifestly showing forth the One of the Trinity Who became immutably incarnate of thee, O pure, all-pure Mother of God, and hath restored the world.

Ode V

*Irmos:* O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God than Thee.

Having ascended to the heights of the virtues, thou didst revile the passions which drag men down, showing forth the sweetness of salvation. O venerable father Anthony, ask forgiveness of sins for thy flock.

Zealously filling the place of thy supplication, O father, thou didst raise up a magnificent temple to the Mother of God. And multitudes of monks now rejoice therein with festive joy, glorifying thy memory.

Forget not the flock which thou didst gather together and in this life didst piously tend, O wise Anthony our father; and take care to lead it into the fold of heaven.

*Theotokion:* Set aright my mind, which laboreth in an abyss of sorrows and is engulfed by the assault of corrupting passions. Save those who flee unto thee, O pure one, for we know none other help than thee.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Whirled about in the abyss of sin, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Thou didst all-gloriously ascend from earthly things to the mansions of heaven, O divinely wise Anthony, and there thou hast been vouchsafed to behold ineffable things, which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, which God hath prepared for those who love Him.

Thou in nowise gavest slumber to thine eyes, letting all thy desire take wing unto God; and following Him with all thy soul without faltering, thou didst without hindrance pass through the night of life, guided by divine visions, O blessed Anthony; and thou hast made thine abode in life divine.

Having been vouchsafed the blessing of the great and holy hierarch Nicetas, O blessed Anthony, thou didst receive from him learned instruction; for thou wast not inundated by the storm of sin, but didst reach the calm haven of the kingdom of heaven, and there thou dost manifestly delight in vision divine.

*Theotokion:* Those who of old grew old through the bitter tasting of the tree and fell headlong, O all-pure one, thou hast restored, having given birth to the Creator, the hypostatic Word, O Virgin Mother and Mistress.

Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader…”—

Native of Rome, thou wast also a gracious scion of Novgorod the Great, for thou didst please God therein by many labors and struggles. Wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed gifts of miracles by Him, and He hath preserved thy body incorrupt for many years. And venerating it, we joyfully cry out to thee with all our heart: Rejoice, O father Anthony!

*Ikos:* How can I recount thy many miracles? How can I describe thy strict manner of life? For I lack a pure heart, in that I have defiled it with shameful acts and have befouled my soul with wicked thoughts. Yet will I dare to raise a song, if thou wilt give words to me, thine unworthy servant, for thou wast found to be an earthly angel and a heavenly man in the flesh, O venerable one. For on earth thou didst reject corruptible things, and through pangs, labors, great abstinence, the endurance of ill treatment and lying on the ground, thou didst follow Christ with all thy soul. And through fasting, the keeping of vigils and prayer thou becamest a model for thy disciples. Wherefore thou hast been shown to be a pure vessel and a habitation of the all-holy Spirit, for which cause we honor thee, crying: Rejoice, O father Anthony!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, Thy three youths spurned the ungodly command, and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thou didst travel far from thy city and homeland, and stretching forth thy hands unto God didst find salvation; and over waters which were made obedient to thee by the hand of God, thou didst reach Novgorod the Great, where thou wast pleasing unto the Master, to Whom thou now dost joyfully chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

With thy wondrous and supernatural arrival thou didst fill the hierarch of Great Novgorod, the Christ-loving people and a multitude of monks with joy and spiritual gladness; for with Christ as thy companion thou didst arrive on a stone, as upon a boat, O father. To Him thou dost now joyfully cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

The assemblies of monastics join chorus and the multitudes of the peoples of Novgorod the Great rejoice in the honored passing of the most blessed Anthony, celebrating a feast of supplication; and with all their soul they joyfully cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* The furnace prefigured thy birthgiving, O most immaculate one; for it did not consume the youths, just as the fire which none can withstand did not consume thy womb. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Deliver thy servants from everlasting fire.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* God, Who descended into the fiery furnace for the Hebrew children and transformed the flame into dew, hymn ye as Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Having acquired the character of Abraham, thou didst travel from the land of Rome to Novgorod the Great, and there thou didst behold God, Who promised thee rich reward. Wherefore, in gladness thou dost cry out earnestly unto Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him ­supremely forever!

Living on earth like an angel in the flesh, like one of the incorporeal ones thou didst subdue the bodiless foe beneath thy feet, and through fasting, vigils and prayer didst acquire purity. Wherefore, radiantly joining chorus with the angels in the heavens, thou criest unto Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Rome, thy homeland, acclaimeth thee, O venerable one, and Novgorod the Great boasteth in thee, receiving thee from the Lord as a treasure which cannot be stolen away; for having obtained thee as a great helper, O blessed Anthony, it now rejoiceth with the choirs of monastics. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we joyfully cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Who doth not marvel at the great mystery of thy birthgiving, O Theotokos? What earthly tongue or incorporeal mind can describe it? For in manner transcending nature and comprehension, O Theotokos, thou gavest birth to the Creator.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify in oneness of mind the Word of God, Who from God came in His ineffable wisdom to renew Adam who had grievously fallen into corruption, and Who became ineffably incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sake.

Ever approaching the shrine of thy relics, we lovingly venerate it and cry out from the depths of our soul: O venerable father Anthony, earnestly beseech Christ God in behalf of thy city and people, that He turn our sorrow into joy, and ask forgiveness of sins, that we may magnify thee unceasingly.

Thou wast the namesake of Anthony the Great, O blessed Anthony: thou didst emulate his manner of life and didst dwell angelically in the monastery of the all-holy Theotokos. Wherefore, thou hast been vouchsafed by God to receive equal honor, and thou now dwellest with him in the heavens. Be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy memory, that we may magnify thee unceasingly.

Now is a great wonder, full of awe, beheld in thee. How is it that thy much-laboring body, which lay in the grave at God’s behest, truly buried for many years, has been preserved unharmed? As He Himself knoweth, He glorifieth those who glorify Him.

*Theotokion:* Thou hast healed the affliction and the ancient suffering of mortals, O most immaculate one, giving birth to Christ, our King and God, Who in the flesh bore our afflictions. Wherefore, blessing thee, O Virgin Mistress, Bride of God, all of us, the generations of men, magnify thee.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples…”—

Standing now with the Mother of God, the all-pure Virgin, before the throne of Christ, O venerable one, cease thou never to pray that victories over aliens be granted our Christ-loving army, salvation of soul and peace for the world, O divinely wise Anthony.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—

Desiring to recall the perishing world out of corruption, O Theotokos, the Lord made His abode within thy womb, as thou didst know. Wherefore, having obtained salvation, we all cry out to thee: O most hymned Virgin who gavest birth to the Joy of the whole world, fill us with joy, ever preserving us from the evils committed by the enemy.

On the Praises, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O divinely wise father Anthony, on earth thou didst love Christ wholly, and didst desire to follow in His divine footsteps; for, taking thy cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst follow Him, O venerable one. And thou now standest in the heavens with the angels, O God-seer, before the Trinity, to Whom do thou pray, that our souls be granted peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O all-wise Anthony, God showed thee to be a shepherd for His reason-endowed flock; and thou didst all-wondrously adorn the church of the Mother of God, wherein to this day thine all-precious relics repose, unharmed by the grave; and they impart healings unto those who have recourse to them with faith. Pray thou now, that peace and great mercy be granted our souls.

O venerable father Anthony, in thy supplications unto God ask confirmation for the Church, encouragement for monks, victories over the enemy for our army, and help for all who with faith have recourse to the monastery of all-holy Mother of God. Pray thou unto her, that she grant our souls peace and great mercy.

Glory…, in Tone VIII—

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Anthony our father; for by thy steps we have truly come to know how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels and companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find mercy.

Now & ever…: Theotokion—

O Mistress, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all want and grief.

Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode III and 4 from Ode VI.

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Epistle to the Galatians, § 213

\(Gal. 5: 22-6: 2\)

Brethren, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

*Stichos:* Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly delight.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Gospel according to Matthew, § 10 \[Mt. 4: 25-5: 12\]

At that time there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

