THE 5TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

FOREFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR EUSYGNIUS

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Come, let us go up with Jesus Who ascendeth the holy mountain, and there let us hear the voice of the living God, the all-unoriginate Father, which through the divine Spirit beareth witness by a cloud to His true Sonship; and, illumined in mind, let us gaze upon Light amid light.

Come, let us join chorus beforehand, let us purify ourselves and faithfully prepare for divine entry into the dwelling-place of the transcendent God; and let us receive the glory which the forechosen apostles were vouchsafed to behold mystically on Mount Tabor.

Come, and, having transformed ourselves with a more exalted transformation, let us prepare ourselves well for the morrow, to ascend the holy mountain of God, beholding the glory of Christ which shineth forth immutably, more brightly than the sun; and, illumined with the light of the Trinity, let us glorify His condescension therein.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Dyed in the blood of thy flesh, O glorious one, thou didst clothe thyself in the purple robe of divine grace, and didst place upon thy head the crown of life incorruptible. And bearing the trophy of the Cross in thy right hand as a scepter, O most wise martyr, thou reignest with Christ, ever rejoicing.

Thou wast recognized, O Eusygnius, as an invincible warrior; for, wielding the sword of the Cross, thou didst go forth to do battle with the adverse foe and didst fell him, contending splendidly and receiving the crown of victory from the one Master and Judge of the contest, Who reigneth forever.

By thine honored sufferings, O glorious athlete Eusygnius, thou didst portray the honored Passion; and, as a victor, thou dwellest in the city on high, rejoicing with all the martyrs and being deified by communion with the Godhead. Wherefore, we celebrate thine honored and holy festival.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone V—

Come, let us ascend the mountain of the Lord to the house of our God, and let us gaze upon the glory of His transfiguration, the glory of the Only-begotten of the Father. Through light let us receive light; and, exalted in the Spirit, let us hymn the consubstantial Trinity forever.

But if it be Saturday evening, we chant: Now & ever…: the dogmatic theotokion.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephrata…”—

Illumined with the effulgence of the virtues, let us proceed to the holy mountain, that we may behold the divine transfiguration of the Lord.

*Stichos:* Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Shining forth like the sun on the mountain today, before undergoing His sufferings, Christ showeth to the initiates of His mysteries a divine sign of His divinity.

*Stichos:* Blessed is the people that knoweth jubilation.

Desiring to transform Adam’s nature, Christ now ascendeth Mount Tabor, that He might disclose His divinity to the initiates of His mysteries.

Glory…, Now & ever…, idiomelon, in the same tone—

O Christ God Who wast transfigured in glory on Mount Tabor and showed the glory of Thy divinity to Thy disciples: illumine us also with the light of the knowledge of Thee, and guide us to the path of Thy commandments, for Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

Troparion, in Tone IV—

Let us go forth to meet the transfiguration of Christ, splendidly celebrating the forefeast thereof, O ye faithful; and let us cry aloud: The day of divine gladness hath arrived! The Master ascendeth Mount Tabor to shine forth the beauty of His divinity! *Once*

AT MATINS

On “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the forefeast, thrice.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

The all-splendid festival of the Master hath arrived! Come ye all, and, having cleansed ourselves noetically beforehand, let us ascend Mount Tabor to behold Christ.

Glory…, Now & ever…: the foregoing is ­repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Splendidly celebrating the day of the forefeast of the glorious and awesome transfiguration of Christ today, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud together: Transform our nature, O Savior, illumining it with Thy divine flesh, and impart to it its original dignity of incorruption, in that Thou art compassionate, that we may all glorify Thee, our one God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: the foregoing is ­repeated.

Canon of the forefeast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and the triodion, with 4 troparia; and the canon of the martyr, with 4 troparia. \(We chant Odes VIII and IX following the pattern of Ode I; but in Odes III through VII the canon of the forefeast is given 8 troparia, while that of the martyr hath 4. But if the forefeast coincide with Sunday, we chant the triodion at compline.\)

Ode I

Canon of the Forefeast, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

Let heaven shine down light from above brighter than the sun, and let the earth hear the words of the living God testifying to the Sonship of Him Who is transfigured; for the Father beareth witness on Mount Tabor.

Christ, Who is visible man but God concealed, doth ascend, disclosing the radiance of His divinity which shineth more brightly than the sun with the splendors of glory.

Christ now cometh forth spiritually to unto Moses, showing forth a vision of glory on Mount Tabor in His direct conversation with him face to face. And, rejoicing, let us celebrate the forefeast today.

Triodion, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* I shall chant unto Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou didst lead Thy people out of the bondage of Egypt and didst inundate the chariot and power of Pharaoh.

Celebrating this day of the forefeast of the transfiguration of Christ our Deliverer, O ye faithful, let us clap our hands in hymnody.

Having reached the threshold of the holy transfiguration of Christ, embracing it we are illumined with divine favor.

Taking the disciples on this very day, Christ ascendeth the mountain, and is transfigured there, illumined by His divinity.

Come ye all, and noetically reaching Mount Tabor, let us gaze upon Christ Who is awesomely transfigured before His disciples.

We cry to Thee like the Prophet David: Mount Tabor and Hermon rejoice in Thy name, O Christ, at Thy transfiguration!

Having our heart purified of the passions like a lofty mountain, let us gaze upon the transfiguration of Christ which illumineth our mind.

*Triadicon:* In Orthodox manner let us glorify the Trinity: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one Godhead, the Unity in three Hypostases.

*Theotokion:* In Orthodox manner, we, the faithful, confess thee to be both Mother and Virgin, who ineffably gavest birth to Christ our God, Who alone hath great mercy.

Canon of the martyr, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

O thou who art all-glorious, save those who with the all-glorious ranks of the angels unceasingly glorify thy memory.

Thy sanctified mind hath been shown to be a temple of the Comforter, O athlete; wherefore, we honor thee with faith.

In thy flesh, O all-blessed one, thou didst portray the death of Him Who suffered in the flesh to bring forth life; and thou hast been vouchsafed true life.

Strengthened by the Spirit, thou didst cast down the might of the iniquitous and didst hold fast to the laws of the Lord, O all-glorious martyr.

*Theotokion:* The curse hath been abolished and grief caused to cease through thy birth­giving, O most blessed and all-immaculate Maiden, thou gladness of the faithful.

Ode III

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

He Who hath dominion over all creation hath become visible, taking the form of a servant; and thereby He hath shown to His disciples the unapproachable effulgence of His divinity, as far as they were able to perceive it.

Christ the Sun cometh to the mountain to shine forth glory, and to dim with His light the shining morning-star; and illumined by His rays, let us celebrate the forefeast today.

Fulfilling the words of eternal life, Christ stood forth as one who showeth things to others that they might understand; and He was well pleased to show forth in Himself the radiant glory of the Father.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Thou didst stand before the tribunal, confessing God the King Who assumed flesh and hath edified men, O wise martyr.

Consumed by burning embers during thy martyrdom, thou didst offer thyself as an unblemished sacrifice to the Ember Who shone forth from the Virgin.

Filled to overflowing with the waters of the Spirit, O glorious one, thou hast dried up the turgid streams of polytheism.

*Theotokion:* All my desire do I direct toward thee, O pure Mistress! Do thou quickly cause carnal lusts to cease within me.

Sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

Let us praise the martyr Eusygnius as one who hath abolished all falsehood by the power of Christ and hath made clear the Faith; for he truly endured tortures, denounced all the cruelty of the tyrants, and hath received a crown of victory from the right hand of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the forefeast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Prepare thyself now, O Tabor! For, lo! Christ cometh to show forth the radiance of His divinity to the glorious disciples on thee, in manner past understanding! Elijah and Moses stood forth in fear, a cloud of light covered them, and the voice of the Father of lights was heard from on high, saying: “This is my beloved Son! Hear ye Him!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

The choir of heaven rejoiceth with those on earth and celebrateth beforehand the effulgence of the Bestower of light, Who ineffably shineth forth, transforming His human form on Tabor, as was His good pleasure.

Drawing nigh to men in Thy coming as God and man, Thou hast mystically enlightened the word with the splendor of miracles; and shining with the glory of divinity, Thou didst shine forth on Tabor with light unapproachable.

Of old, Jesus, son of Nun, caused the sun to halt, prefiguring the day of Thy divine suffering; and before suffering on Thy precious Cross, O Savior, Thou Thyself didst dim the shining of the sun with the divine rays of Thy countenance.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Casting off the slumber of despondency, O martyr Eusygnius, thou didst proceed boldly to thy contest with wakefulness and unwavering faith.

Rejoicing in God thy Savior, O right wondrous martyr, thou didst consider the torture of thy body to be like sweet sustenance.

Humbling thyself with divine integrity, O athlete, thou didst cast down the prideful arrogance of him who fell headlong in his malice.

Thou wast shown to be an invincible warrior, struggling in battle; and, completing thy martyrdom, thou didst destroy the incorporeal foe.

*Theotokion:* O all-holy and ever-virgin Maiden, thou gavest birth to the Word Who is equally powerful and equally enthroned with the Father and the Spirit.

Ode V

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Rejoicing, let us faithfully follow Christ, for, lo! he goeth to the mountain, taking with Him His foremost disciples; and, shining forth before them with unapproachable beauty outshining the sun, He hath shone forth His glory.

Let heaven be enlightened yet more splendidly today, by Christ’s ascent to the mountain, for He shineth forth with light unapproachable, dimming the rays of the sun with the glory of His divinity, in that He is the Bestower of light.

Christ hath shown the disciples a mystery on Tabor, His countenance shining forth more brilliantly than beams of light; He Who clotheth Himself with light, as saith the psalmist, hath made the vesture of His robes as white as snow.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Cleaving earnestly to the Master, O all-wise Eusygnius, thou didst withdraw from wickedness.

Thou didst not offer worship in dead temples, O God-bearer, knowing that the Lord, the living God, is in the heavens.

Uplifted upon a tree, O martyr of valiant mind, with faith thou didst portray the sufferings of the Dispassionate One.

*Theotokion:* The Word became incarnate in thy womb, O pure one, delivering the world from the irrational carnal passions.

Ode VI

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

Making ready for His friends a bridal-chamber of the glory of that joy which is to come, Christ ascendeth the mountain, leading them up from life below to the life of heaven.

Astonishing the understanding of the disciples, Christ shone forth the effulgence of heaven on earth, while the leaders of the law and the prophets stood before Him as servants; and they bore witness to God as representatives of the living and the dead.

Christ cometh now to manifest Himself as a luminary by the radiance of divine effulgence in a place of darkness; and we walk toward His radiance, rejoicing in the sight of His countenance.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* I pour forth my prayer unto the Lord, and to Him do I declare my grief; for my soul is full of evil and my life hath drawn nigh unto hell, and like Jonah I pray: Lead me up from corruption, O God!

Having laid up the understanding of truth in thy heart in noble manner, O blessed one, knowing well the ways of the enemy’s mind thou didst hasten to the tribunal and didst destroy his army with the weapon of the Cross.

The servants of the demons, understanding thee to be a servant of the Trinity, O martyr Eusygnius, gave thee over to tortures, imprisonment and an undeserved death; yet were they vanquished by thine invincible opposition, O thou who art most rich.

The torrents of thy blood have dried up the turgid torrents of iniquity, the false rivers of ungodliness and the streams of wickedness, O martyr, and are shown to be an unfathomable abyss of healings for the faithful.

*Theotokion:* O pure Virgin Mother, who hast caused the gardens of evil to wither up through the Word Who sprung forth within thee, sever the wicked thoughts of my soul at the root and sow therein the beautiful plants of the virtues.

Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared…”—

Human nature is made divinely luminous today by the transfiguration of God, and crieth out in gladness: Christ is transfigured, saving us all!

*Ikos:* By the divine transfiguration of our image, which of old was ruined by corruption, hath the Creator led our forefather Adam up from the chambers of hades, and He deifieth our understanding. He remaineth both God and man, bearing the nature of each in unity, without confusion or separation. Wherefore, He shineth forth now ineffably on Tabor, and from His flesh emitteth the rays of His divinity, illumining those who cry aloud: Christ is transfigured, saving us all!

Ode VII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Let us follow the choice of the disciples to the translation from the earth which leadeth up to the heights, gazing upon the awesome sight of Christ; and, marvelling, let us cry out with them: Blessed art Thou, O God!

With water and fire Thou didst purify human nature which had become defiled; and through Thy flesh Thou showest forth its radiance, O Savior, Thy countenance shining forth more brightly than the sun in an image of the glory which is to come.

Let us go forth to the holy mountain with Christ, Who leadeth up the son of Zebedee and the eminent Peter, whom He chose to be witnesses of His glory and who cry: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Having illumined thy soul with the blood which thou didst shed out of love for the incarnate Christ, O martyr, thou didst pass over to Him, crying out, rejoicing: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Burning with love for the Savior, thou didst avoid the defiles of impiety, O Eusygnius, and didst endure the winter of cruel torments, crying: Blessed art Thou, O God!

With the drops of thy divine blood still flowing, O all-glorious one, thou didst stand before Christ the Master, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

That thou mightest inherit the everlasting life of the divine kingdom, O Eusygnius, thou didst spurn the glory of this transitory life, crying: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to a new Child, Whom the Father begat before time began, O pure Theotokos. To Him do we all chant: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Who will not marvel at the magnificence of Thy glory, O King of glory, which, transfigured therein, Thou didst show to Thy friends, illumining them with divine splendors? With them illumine us all with Thy light, for with faith we chant hymns of the forefeast.

The heights of heavenly life and the divine radiance of everlasting glory do Thou grant to Thy servants who now celebrate the forefeast of the splendid solemnity of Thy transfiguration, whereon, shining forth light, Thou illuminest those who hymn Thee, O Christ, Bestower of life.

As Light unapproachable and the Bestower of light, O Ever-existent and All-unoriginate One, Who clothest Thyself in light as in a garment, coming in the flesh Thou hast shone forth light in the world; and Thou causest light to shine round about the mountain, showing forth an image of the Father’s glory.

Triodion

*Irmos:* In the furnace the captive youths confessed Christ the King, saying with a loud voice: Hymn the Lord, all ye works!

Shining forth, this present day of the radiant transfiguration of the Lord commandeth the world to cry aloud: Hymn and exalt Him supremely, all ye works, forever!

Come, ye faithful, and in mind let us go to the holy mountain, to behold the most radiant transfiguration of Christ; for it illumineth all who glorify it forever.

With a pure heart let us go forth today to meet beforehand the transfiguration of Christ, and let us cry out splendidly: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Triadicon:* Let us theologize concerning the one Godhead in three Persons—the Father, the Son and the all-holy Spirit,—chanting together: Hymn and exalt Him supremely ­forever!

*Theotokion:* Christ the King, to Whom the Virgin Mary gave birth for us, while remaining a pure virgin even after giving birth, do ye hymn, all ye works, and exalt supremely ­forever!

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Protected wholly by the shield of piety, O most blessed one, by grace thou didst vanquish the ­iniquitous, chanting unceasingly: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

When thou wast troubled, thou didst cry out to God thy Benefactor, and He hearkened unto thee and delivered thee from evils, who cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou didst not offer irrational worship to inanimate gods, O martyr, but offered thyself as a pure sacrifice to God, chanting unceasingly: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

That thou mightest receive life and glory, O all-wise Eusygnius, thou didst die to the world and wast slain, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Theotokion:* O merciful Virgin who gavest birth to the all-merciful God, vouchsafe divine mercy unto all who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Ode IX

Canon of the Forefeast

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Rejoice, O heaven, knowing now the never-waning Sun Who shineth forth from the earth and desireth to cover the radiance of the sun with divine glory! And let the earth join chorus radiantly, shining with heavenly splendor and brilliance, becoming light!

Chanting, David foretold Thy transfiguration, saying: Who is like unto Thee among the sons of God, O Lord? For, glorified in the councils of the saints, Thou hast shown Thyself as great to those around Thee and awesome in the glory of Thy divine countenance.

O Word of God, Wisdom, Power and Image of the Father! O God Who art understood by the faithful and art recognized as man! Vouchsafe unto us Thy transfiguration, that we may celebrate the radiant festival in the light of splendid good deeds.

Triodion

*Irmos:* With hymns do we magnify thee, the Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, the heavenly bridal-chamber, who gavest birth to the Author of our salvation.

Celebrating this the first day of Thine all-glorious and most radiant transfiguration, O Christ, we magnify Thee with hymns.

Earnest in our knowledge of the glorious transfiguration of the Lord, let us spiritually illumine our thoughts, magnifying them.

Transformed with the goodly transformation of the transfiguration of Christ, we find ourselves made radiant by our good works, magnifying it.

*Triadicon:* With hymns we magnify Thee, the Trinity in three Hypostases, the indivisible Essence, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

*Theotokion:* With hymns we magnify thee, the bush which Moses beheld, burning yet not consumed, who received the fire of the Godhead.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

With the might of Christ thou didst slay the feeble enemy who had exalted himself and now truly rageth in vain, O martyr; and thou didst bow thy head to be cut off by the sword and didst hallow all the earth with the flow of thy blood.

O Eusygnius, thou art blessed as the adornment of all athletes, the beauty of martyrs, the unshakable pillar of the Church, the all-manifest bulwark of the pious, the divine splendor of those who have recourse to thee, and a star most radiant.

The vapor of thy sweat letteth fall a sweet-smelling myrrh, O Eusygnius: it perfumeth the hearts of us who hymn thee and dispelleth the stench of passions, tribulations and sorrows, O valiant athlete of Christ.

O Jesus, Sun of glory, Who hast illumined the memory of Thine athlete today: by his supplications illumine, I pray, my soul which hath been darkened by the deceit of the serpent, that I may glorify Thee as the true God, Who lovest mankind.

*Theotokion:* O portal of the Light, illumine the eyes of my heart, I pray, which have been blinded by the darkness of sin, and show them as receptive to the divine radiance, that I may honor and magnify thee with godly voice.

Exapostilarion of the forefeast: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars…”—

He Who created the sky and gave light to the stars, ascending Mount Tabor today, illumineth the disciples with the radiance of His divinity.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in the same melody—

Today Christ hath shone forth light on Tabor! Today the voice of the Father is audible as thunder from on high, crying: “This is My beloved Son!”

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Celebrating this day the forefeast of the all-holy and glorious transfiguration, let us glorify Christ Who hath transfigured our nature with the fire of the Godhead, and illumined it with incorruption, as it was before.

*Stichos:* Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Come, let us ascend the holy mountain, and gaze with faith upon the most radiant transfiguration of the Lord, worshipping Him with faith; and let us say: Thou alone art God incarnate, Who hast deified mankind.

*Stichos:* O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.

This is the day of the forefeast, whereon Christ is transfigured. Moses and Elijah were with Him on Mount Tabor, and His disciples; and a voice was heard, saying: “This is truly My chosen Son!”

Glory…, Now & ever…, idiomelon—

Moses who beheld God, and Elijah of the fiery chariot, who traversed the heavens unconsumed, bore witness to Thee, O Christ, as the Fulfiller of the law and the prophets, at Thy transfiguration. Vouchsafe Thine enlightenment, O Master, to us also, that with them we may hymn Thee forever.

