THE 9TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

AFTERFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE MATTHIAS

AT VESPERS

We chant “Blessed is the man…”, the first ­antiphon.

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 8 stichera: 3 for the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Come, and with faith let us celebrate together the all-radiant and divine transfiguration of Christ, and, transformed by a goodly transformation, let us spiritually mount to the lofty summit of the virtues with the disciples of Christ, that, taught with them the revelation of awesome mysteries, we may glorify the Savior and Lord.

Rejoice piously and be glad, O honored Church of the faithful, celebrating now this honored and most radiant feast; for the Master of all, Who is now transfigured, doth manifestly illumine with the brilliance of ineffable splendor the disfigurement of man, radiantly emitting an effulgence which surpasseth the brightness of the sun.

The God and Creator of all, taking the form of a servant in the ineffable richness of His loving-kindness, now saveth man from the ancient darkness, His face shining, disclosing the effulgence of the Godhead in His flesh; wherefore, filled with awe and fear, the disciples worshipped the Master of all, falling ­prostrate.

And 5 stichera of the apostle, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “O most lauded martyrs…”—

O Apostle Matthias, thou didst complete the divine choir from whence Judas had fallen, and with the divine brilliance of thy wise discourses thou hast driven away the gloom of the madness of idolatry with the grace of God. Make thou supplication now, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O blessed Matthias, thou didst traverse the noetic Eden like a river overflowing with divine waters; and thou hast given the earth mystic waters to drink, and hast shown it to be fertile; wherefore, pray thou, that God grant unto our souls peace and great mercy. *Twice*

O divinely inspired Matthias, with the lightning-flashes of thy teachings thou didst hallow the circuit of the world, illumining all, guiding all to the knowledge of God, making those who slept before in the darkness of vanity and the gloom of all ungodliness to be receptacles of the light.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O glorious Apostle Matthias, and thou wast a beacon of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Now & ever…, in Tone II—

Sanctifying the whole world with Thy light, Thou wast transfigured on a lofty mountain, O Good One, showing Thy power to Thy disciples, that Thou mightest deliver the world from transgression. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee: O compassionate Lord, save Thou our souls!

Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three ­Readings:

A Reading from the Acts of the Apostles \[Acts 1: 15-26\]

In those days, Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, \(the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty\): “Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry. Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Haceldama, that is to say, The field of blood. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishopric let another take. Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that He was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of His resurrection.” And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said: “Thou, Lord, Who knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two Thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.” And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

A Reading from the General Epistle of John \[I John 3: 21-4: 6\]

Beloved: If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, because we keep His commandments, and do things that are pleasing in His sight. And this is His commandment, that we should believe on the name of His Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as He gave us commandment. And he that keepeth His commandments dwelleth in Him, and He in him. And hereby we know that He abideth in us, by the Spirit which He hath given us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is He that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are of the wo rld: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us.

A Reading from the General Epistle of John \[I John 4: 11-16\]

Beloved: If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and His love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because He hath given us of His Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day…”—

Taking the form of the first man Adam, O Christ, in Thy loving-kindness, Thou didst reveal Thyself as the second Adam, and wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, disclosing Thy divinity, O my Savior.

*Stichos:* Thine are the heavens, and Thine is the earth.

Beholding Thy transfiguration on the holy mountain, O Christ, the foremost representatives of grace and the law were amazed; and with them we worship Thee and the Father and the divine Spirit.

*Stichos:* Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in Thy name.

Creation is manifestly enlightened by Thy transfiguration, O Christ, which, as God, Thou didst show forth on Tabor to the divine apostles, and to Moses and Elijah, ineffably shining more brightly than the sun.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Full of divine zeal, O right wondrous Apostle Matthias, with zeal thou wast zealous for God Almighty, Who hath shown thee to be full of divine miracles; for, possessing strange zeal, thou didst acquire integrity through thine actions. Wherefore, dwelling with the heavenly choirs in the highest, pray thou to the Word, Christ our God, O beholder of God, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

O Christ God Who wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, showing the glory of Thy divinity to Thy disciples, illumine us all with the light of the knowledge of Thee, and guide us on the path of Thy commandments, as Thou alone art good and lovest mankind.

Troparion of the apostle, in Tone III—

O holy Apostle Matthias, entreat the merciful God, that He grant to our souls remission of transgressions.

Glory…, Now & ever…: troparion of the feast, in Tone VII—

Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ God, Who didst show Thy glory unto Thy disciples as far as they could bear it. May Thine everlasting light shine forth also upon us sinners through the prayers of the Theotokos. O Bestower of light, glory be to Thee!

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the apostle; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone II—

He who is glorious among the apostles pursued the nations and taught the ends of the earth to worship Thee, O Christ God, with the Father and the Spirit. For his sake establish Thy Church and send Thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful One Who lovest mankind. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Revealing the human form of Thy second and awesome coming with Thy glory, O Savior, Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor. Elijah and Moses conversed with Thee, and Thy three disciples were summoned to behold Thy glory, O Master, and marvelled at Thy radiance. O Thou Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine our souls!

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV—

As the Sun of righteousness, Christ emitted thee like a ray of light, to illumine the whole world, O glorious Apostle Matthias; and in thy supplications thou art luminous and dost enlighten with the never-waning light of God all who celebrate thy holy memory with faith. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—

Moses and Elijah stood before Thee when Thou didst ascend the mountain with the disciples and shone forth in the glory of the Father; for the law and the prophets serve God; and the Father, declaring Christ’s essential Sonship, called Him His Son. Him do we hymn with Thee and the Spirit.

After the Polyeleos, this magnification—

We magnify thee, O Matthias, apostle of Christ, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

Selected Psalm verses—

A The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands. \[Ps. 18: 2\]

B The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. \[Ps. 88: 6\]

A In the stead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee. \[Ps. 44: 17\]

B The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth. \[Ps. 49: 1\]

A From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord is to be praised. \[Ps. 112: 3\]

B Thy lightnings have shone forth throughout the world. \[Ps. 96: 4\]

A The heavens declared His righteousness. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

B And all the peoples saw His glory. \[Ps. 96: 6\]

A The princes of Judah are their rulers. \[Ps. 67: 28\]

B God is King over the nations. \[Ps. 46: 9\]

\[Magnification—

We magnify thee, O Matthias, apostle of Christ, and we honor the pangs and labors whereby thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.\]

A God is glorified in the council of the saints. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

B Great and terrible is He toward all who are round about Him. \[Ps. 88: 8\]

A Say among the nations that the Lord is King. \[Ps. 95: 10\]

B Declare among the heathen His glory, and among all peoples His wonders. \[Ps. 95: 3\]

A Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

B Their words unto the ends of the world. \[Ps. 18: 5\]

A He hath subdued peoples under us, and nations under our feet. \[Ps. 46: 4\]

B Great is our God, and great is His strength, and of His understanding there is no measure. \[Ps. 146: 5\]

A He will give power and strength unto His people. Blessed be God. \[Ps. 67: 36\]

Glory…, Now & ever…

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Glory to Thee, O God! *Thrice*

After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Casting down the pride of idolatry and desiring the sufferings of the Savior, O all-blessed Apostle Matthias, thou wast revealed to the world by heaven, pouring forth miracles upon all, and becamest a teacher for the nations. Wherefore, we honor thy memory as is meet, glorifying thee in hymns and faithfully magnifying thee, O divinely eloquent one who art most rich. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: that of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Thou wast transfigured upon the mountain, O God, in the midst of the all-wise Elijah and Moses, with James, Simon and John. And Peter, there present, said to Thee: “It would be good to make here three tabernacles: one for Moses, one for Elijah and one for Thee, Christ the Master.” O Thou Who then didst shine Thy light upon them, enlighten our souls.

Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Let every breath praise the Lord.

Gospel according to John, § 67 \[21:15-25\]

At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the dead, and saith to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou Me more than these?” He saith unto him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He saith unto him: “Feed My lambs.” He saith to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou Me?” He saith unto him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He saith unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He saith unto him the third time: “Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time, Lovest thou Me? And he said unto Him” “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus saith unto him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He saith unto him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, which is he that betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him saith to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” Jesus saith unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone VI—

Grace hath been poured forth in thy lips, O glorious Apostle Matthias, and thou wast a luminary of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe on the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including the irmos, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Speaking words of life and giving instruction concerning that which is divine, Christ said to his friends: “Recognize the Father in Me, for I emit unapproachable light, unto the joy of those who chant: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”

“Ye will be invested with the power of tongues, O My friends and disciples, and will be marvelous in the richness thereof, for ye will be filled with glory. For I shall reveal Myself to be brighter than the sun, illumining those who chant in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”

Shining forth today with divine radiance on Mount Tabor, as He promised, Christ hath laid bare His countenance to His disciples. And, full of light‑bearing and divine splendor, they chanted in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Canon of the apostle, with 8 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns do I hymn thee, O Matthias, friend of Christ”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

O Matthias, bestow thou a beam of salvation from heaven upon me who now hymn thy radiant festival with hymns, I pray.

Thou hast been shown to be a great sun of the great Light, O right wondrous one; for thou hast conversed directly with God Who is with us, O apostle.

Submitting to the laws of the Master, O blessed one, with thy tongue, as with a net, thou didst draw forth the ends of the earth from the abyss of ignorance.

*Theotokion:* In His goodness, the all-divine Word saveth all of me, for He desired to become incarnate of thy womb, O pure Mother of God.

*Katavasia:* The irmoi of the first canon of the service of the Transfiguration

Ode III

Canon of the feast

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Having put on all of Adam and transformed the nature which of old had become dark, Thou didst illumine it with the transformation of Thine appearance and didst render it divine, O Christ.

Christ, Who of old guided Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and the cloud, hath ineffably shone forth in light today on Mount Tabor.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Strengthened by the hand of the Author of life, O wise one, thou wast able to snatch away the spoils of the mighty one and enslave him by grace.

Loving the Teacher and serving Him industriously, O right wondrous one, thou savest men from deception.

The all-accomplishing Spirit chose thee, O divinely eloquent one, to fill the twelfth place in the holy choir of the disciples.

*Theotokion:* Possessed of thine aid, O pure one, I fear not the assaults of wicked enemies; for having thee as an intercessor, I vanquish the hordes thereof.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII—

On the mountain wast Thou transfigured, and Thy disciples beheld Thy glory as far they could bear it, O Christ God; that when they would see Thee crucified, they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, and proclaim to the world that Thou art of a truth the Effulgence of the Father.

*Ikos:* Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which have ever been dragged down to the earth! Be ye upborne and rise up to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that with them we may see the glory of our God, and may hear the voice which they heard from on high; for they preached the Effulgence of the Father.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

With the lightning-flashes of thy divine words thou didst consume the deception of the wicked one and didst enlighten the faithful to hymn the coming in the flesh of Him Who hath dominion over all things; and thou didst emulate His divine sufferings. Wherefore, assembling, we celebrate in gladness thy holy memory and cry out to thee together: O Apostle Matthias, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded…”—

The lightning hidden beneath the flesh of Thy nature and divine majesty, O Christ our Benefactor, didst thou show forth upon the holy mountain, shining upon the disciples who were with Thee. And when they perceived Thine unbearable glory, they cried out: “Holy art Thou, for, though Thou art unapproachable, Thou art visible to the world in the flesh, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!”

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* I have heard of Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, how Thou wast born of the Virgin, that Thou mightest save from deception those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Forming the law in writing on Sinai, O Christ God, Thou wast manifest, borne in the cloud, the fire, the darkness and the whirlwind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

That Thou mayest confirm Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, in that Thou hast existed from before the beginning of time, Thou didst shine forth ineffably on Tabor, likewise appointing Thine ascent in a cloud.

Those who conversed with Thee as servants stood before Thee, O Master Christ; and Thou didst converse with them in the vapor of fire and darkness, and the moist whistling wind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Moses, Who of old foresaw Thee in the fire and the bush, and Elijah, who was taken up in the chariot of fire, arriving on Tabor proclaimed Thy glory, for the sake of Thy Cross, O Christ.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Proclaiming the one Essence of the Godhead, the one Monarchy and Dominion, O all-blessed one, thou didst pursue the flock of the nations.

The Lord brought thee to the sea of life, O all-wise one, like a horse roiling the bitter waters of polytheism.

With divine discourse thou didst renew stony hearts, O glorious one, sowing piety and a knowledge of the Truth.

*Theotokion:* O vessel of virginity and habitation of the infinite Being, illumine my soul, which hath been darkened by many passions.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who separated the primal light from light, that Thy works may hymn Thee, the Creator, in light: direct Thou our paths in Thy light.

The mountains inclined themselves before Thy face; for Thou wast well pleased to accept, in Thine earthly form, the light and heavenly rays which the sun came and laid at Thy feet.

Moses and Elijah cried to the disciples who were being instructed on holy Mount Tabor: “Behold, Christ the Savior is the God Whom we proclaimed of old!”

The immutable Nature, having mingled itself with human nature, shone forth ineffably, abundantly disclosing to the apostles the light of the immaterial Godhead.

When the disciples beheld Thee, the ever-existent Effulgence, shining in the glory of the Father, O Christ, they cried out to Thee: “Direct Thou our paths in Thy light!”

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

The true Vine put thee forth as a most fruitful branch producing the grapes which exude the wine of salvation; and drinking thereof, O blessed one, we who are held fast by ignorance have cast off the drunkenness of deception.

Thou wast shown to fulfill the choir of the twelve disciples from which the betrayer had cast himself, finding bitter strangulation, having lifted his heel against Christ, O wondrous Matthias, proclaimer of the mysteries.

Thou wast cast into the world as divine salt, O blessed and all-praised Apostle Matthias, cleansing away the corruption of falsehood with sweet doctrines, driving away sickness, and healing wounds of body and soul.

*Theotokion:* By thine all-pure birthgiving, O Virgin Bride of God, Adam shed the ugly garments of ancient mortality and clothed himself in a holy robe of truth which was in nowise polluted by the passions.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* When I was troubled, I cried unto the Lord, and the God of my salvation hearkened unto me.

Shining forth the light which is far brighter than the sun, the Savior illumined us on Tabor.

Having ascended Mount Tabor, O Christ, Thou wast transfigured; and having cast falsehood utterly into darkness, Thou hast illumined us.

Recognizing Thee as God on Tabor, O Christ, the glorious apostles, marvelling, bowed down their knees.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou becamest a god by adoption, deified by divine union, receiving pristine rays of light from God, and thou hast illumined the faith and cleansed the earth of the darkness of idolatry. *Twice*

Lo! every prophecy of the sacred prophets is contained in thee, the disciple; for thou wast an eye-witness, emulator and apostle of Him Whom thou didst proclaim of old, O Matthias, servant of God.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, we, the faithful, call thee the noetic sanctuary, the untouchable mercy-seat, the golden lampstand, the spiritual table bearing the Bread of life.

Kontakion of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today…”—

Thy luminous sound which hath gone forth like the sun into all the earth doth enlighten the Church of the nations with grace, O wondrous Apostle Matthias.

*Ikos:* Grant me a stream of discourse, O Lord Who created the nature of water; strengthen my heart, O Compassionate One Who established the earth by Thy word; and enlighten my thoughts, O Thou Who clothest Thyself in light as with a garment, that I may say and chant fitting things worthily, to honor Thine Apostle Matthias, O greatly Merciful One.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Illumined by the light of unapproachable glory on Mount Tabor, the apostles cried out to Christ: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

Enraptured by the effulgence of the divine voice, the dew-bearing cloud and the radiance, O Christ, the apostles chanted: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

When he beheld Thee in unapproachable light on Mount Tabor, O Christ, Peter cried out: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

Present with thee, the Author of life, when Thou didst cause the light of Thy countenance to shine forth, the sons of Zebedee cried out: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

With the flood of thy divine wisdom thou didst dry up the torrent of falsehood, O glorious one, and with a torrent of sustenance thou hast given drink to those who cry with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!

By the power of God Almighty thou didst set at nought the wiles of the enemy before the face of thine advance, O apostle, and the mountains and hills of ungodliness were broken down.

*Theotokion:* Behold the Virgin of whom the great Isaiah said in the Spirit, that she would conceive in her womb and give birth unto the God to Whom we chant: O Lord God, blessed art Thou!

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon, consumed by zeal divine, manfully trampled the tyrant and the flame underfoot; and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed they chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Christ, Who upholdeth all things by His hand, hath with His all-pure feet ascended Mount Tabor, whereon His face shone with radiance brighter than the beams of the sun, and showed forth those highest among the law and grace, who chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

He Who ineffably manifested Himself on Mount Tabor with unapproachable glory, the intangible and never-waning Light, the Effulgence of the Father, illumining creation hath deified men who sing: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Moses and Elijah, standing on Mount Tabor as befitteth priests, manifestly beholding the Hypostasis of the divine character—Christ Who shone forth in the Father’s glory—chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The face of Moses once was filled with glory in its appearance because of the manifestation of God; and Christ is arrayed in light and glory as in a robe, for, being light itself, He illumineth those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The disciples, beholding Christ surrounded by the luminous cloud on Tabor, fell to the ground, their minds enlightened, and hymned Him with the Father and the Spirit, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

As the mouth of God thou didst snatch from the throat of the slayer of men those whom he had cruelly slaughtered and made food for his malice, O wise one, and with the laver of regeneration thou didst bring them to the Lord, chanting unceasingly: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

As the weapon of the word of God, O glorious one, thou didst utterly grind down the sword of falsehood and the weapon of evil, and by the power of God thou didst cast down the sacrifices, pillars and temples of the idolaters, but hast made into temples of the Trinity those who cry: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou didst show thyself to be the heaven of the Word, declaring the ineffably divine glory of the Only-begotten, O most wise Matthias, thou lightning-flash of grace, seeker of the lost, lampstand of the divine Light, initiate of ineffable mysteries, whom we hymn together with gladness.

*Theotokion:* In manner transcending nature didst thou conceive; in manner past recounting thou gavest birth to the Creator of human nature, Who, though inseparable from the Father, became man, O pure Mistress. Him doth all creation hymn, chanting: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Suddenly illumined with a new outpouring of light, the disciples, stricken with awe, looked one at another; and, astonished, they bowed down to the earth and worshipped Thee, the Master of all.

A voice of divine sound was sent forth from out of the cloud, announcing the wonder; for the Father of lights cried to the apostles: “This is My beloved Son! Heed ye Him!”

Having seen new and all-glorious things and heard the voice of the Father on Tabor, the servants of the Word cried out: “This is our Savior, the image of the Prototype!”

O immutable Image of Him Who Is, O Immovable One, unalterable Seal, Son, Word, Wisdom, Arm, Right Hand of the Most High, Power: Thee do we hymn with the Father and the Spirit.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

The Savior called thee His friend who served His commandments, O blessed apostle, the heir to His kingdom, who will be enthroned with Him on that awesome day which is to come, O all-wise Matthias, thou fulfillment of the twelve disciples.

Having traversed the sea of life with the sail of the Cross, O blessed one, thou didst reach the harbor of peace and thine uttermost desire; and, rejoicing now, thou standest with the choir of the apostles, entreating Him Who loveth mankind in our behalf.

Thy tongue hath been shown to be a truly radiant lamp, a shining beacon of the Spirit, which consumeth foreign doctrines, burneth up alien fire, O wise one, and shineth forth light upon those who sleep in the darkness of ­ignorance.

*Theotokion:* Thou, alone among women, hast brought an end to the curse of the first-created, O Bride of God, having given birth in the flesh to the Infinite One Who became circumscribed; and thou hast restored the bounds of nature, O undefiled one, and by thine all-glorious mediation hast united those things which of old were sundered.

Exapostilarion of the apostle: Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the holy place…”—

Directing the course of thy beautiful feet on high, O Apostle Matthias, thou didst mount, rejoicing, to the path to heaven; and, standing before the Trinity, thou beholdest the Son in the Father and the divine Spirit. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate thine all-sacred and divine memory. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…: exapostilarion of the feast—

O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy manifest light the light of the Father and the light of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light.

On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

On Mount Tabor the glory of the Trinity was manifestly made known when Thou wast transfigured, O mine all-good Savior.

At the transfiguration a cloud of light was manifestly stretched forth, filling with amazement the foremost of the divine ­disciples.

Elijah and Moses stood before Thee, O Word, at Thy transfiguration, and the Father bore witness, speaking from heaven.

And 3 stichera of the apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

With the rod of grace thou didst draw men forth from the abyss of vainglory, O right wondrous Matthias, obedient to the behest of the Teacher Who illumined thine understanding in all things and showed thee to be an apostle and an honored divine herald of His unapproachable divinity, O most blessed one.

The effulgence of the Spirit descended upon thee in a fiery vision, O blessed one, and made thee a divine vessel which quickly driveth away the gloom of ungodliness; and thou dost illumine the world with the radiance of thy most wise words, O initiate of the mysteries, adornment of the apostles, blessed witness of Christ.

Illumining those who sit in darkness with the lightning-flashes of thy preaching, O glorious one, thou didst show them forth as children, through faith, of God the Master, Whose sufferings and death thou didst emulate, and of Whose glory thou art heir, in that thou art wise and divinely eloquent, and a disciple of the Truth.

Glory…, in Tone II—

Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, marked by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; and thou wast sent by Him unto the nations who were perishing, to convert men to the light of divine knowledge, O Apostle Matthias, and, having finished the struggles of thy divine sufferings and divers torments, thou didst commit thy soul to Christ. Him do thou entreat, O most blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.

Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone—

On Mount Tabor Moses and Elijah beheld God, Who had become incarnate of the Virgin Maiden, for the deliverance of men.

Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IV of the canon of the feast; and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the apostle.

Prokimenon of the feast; and that of the apostle, in Tone VIII—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

*Stichos:* The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of His hands.

Reading from the Acts of the Apostles, § 2 \[Acts 1: 12-17, 21-26\]

In those days, the apostles returned unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey, and when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholemew, and Matthew, James, the son of Alphæus, and Simon the Zealot, and Jude, son of James. These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary, the Mother of Jesus, and with His brethren. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said \(the number of names together was about an hundred and twenty\): “Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit, by the mouth of David, spoke before concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part in this ministry. Wherefore, of these men who have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John unto that same day that He was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of His resurrection.” And they appointed two, Joseph, called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said: “Thou, Lord, Who knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two Thou hast chosen, that he may take part in this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.” And they gave forth lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

Alleluia, in Tone I—

*Stichos:* The heavens confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in the congregation of saints.

*Stichos:* God is glorified in the council of the saints.

Gospel according to Luke, § 40 \[Lk. 9: 1-6\]

At that time, Jesus called His twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. And He sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. And He said unto them: “Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece. And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.” And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the Gospel and healing everywhere.

Communion Verse—

Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

