THE 10TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

AFTERFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF THE LORD

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR & ARCHDEACON LAURENCE

AT VESPERS

At “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the Transfiguration, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign…”—

Thou hast shone forth today in manifest splendor on Mount Tabor like the radiant sun, O Savior, Thou Word of the Father, showing Thy friends that Thou art He Who in His loving-kindness didst assume human nature, O Christ. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, O almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

Today the angels of heaven rejoice with men, celebrating Thy glorious effulgence, O Christ, and Thine appearance upon Mount Tabor, whereat Thou didst stand in the presence of Moses and Elijah, and Peter, James and John, who hymned Thee, O Christ Who lovest mankind, almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls.

Let all the worldly and supernatural order now be moved to praise Christ our God Who hath dominion over both the living and the dead; for, divinely transfigured, He stood on Tabor in the presence of the first heralds of the law and grace, as He, the Savior of our souls, was well pleased to do.

And 3 stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Having served the Word blamelessly, O venerable one, thou wast offered unto the Lord as a sacrifice of sweet savor, consumed by material fire; and thou hast been counted worthy of the joy of heaven, where thou dost ever pray in behalf of those who honor thee, O Laurence.

Having laid thyself up as a treasure for the Lord and submitted to His words, O divinely blessed one, thou didst richly distribute inviolate wealth unto the poor, O wise martyr, wisely and wondrously enduring torments.

Let Laurence now be splendidly praised: the beauty of the martyrs, the glorious and wondrous warrior, the wellspring of miracles, the helper of the oppressed, the star of great radiance, the sacred martyr.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone IV: automelon—

When Thou wast transfigured, O Lord, and the Father bore witness to Thee before Thy crucifixion, and the mountain became like unto the heavens, Thou wast covered with a cloud as with a tent. In that place were Peter, James and John, for they were to be with Thee also at the time of Thy betrayal, that, beholding Thy wonders, they might not fear Thy sufferings. Grant that we also may worship them in peace, for the sake of Thy great mercy.

Aposticha stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Ineffably hath the Lord shown forth the glory of His divinity on Mount Tabor unto those disciples whom He wished.

*Stichos:* Thine are the heavens, and Thine is the earth.

Come ye, let us make haste with the disciples to the heights of the virtues, that with them we too may be counted worthy of grace.

*Stichos:* Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in Thy name.

O all ye born of earth, let us cleanse our hearts, that straightway there may come unto us the glory of the grace of the threefold Sun.

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone IV—

Taking Thy disciples up to a lofty mountain before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, Thou wast transfigured before them, desiring in Thy loving-kindness and authority to show forth the splendor of the resurrection, which do Thou also grant us in peace, O God, as Thou art merciful and lovest mankind.

Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV—

In his sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyr Laurence received an imperishable crown from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, he cast down the tormenters and destroyed the feeble audacity of the demons. By his supplications save Thou our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…, the Troparion of the Transfiguration, in Tone VII—

Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ God, Who didst show Thy glory unto Thy disciples as far as they could bear it. May Thine ever-existing light shine forth also upon us sinners through the prayers of the Theotokos. O Bestower of light, glory be to Thee!

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, the troparion of the martyr; Now & ever…, the troparion of the feast, again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Christ our Savior, Thou didst show Thy glory to Thy foremost disciples, and didst cause Thine immutable divinity to shine forth. And having called down a radiant cloud, Thou didst converse with Moses and Elijah. Therefore, Peter said: “O Compassionate One, it is good to be here with Thee!” O Thou Who shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine our souls!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in the same tone & melody–

Transfigured in the unapproachable glory of Thy divine light, O Christ, Thou didst illumine Thy godly disciples, John, Peter and James, and didst move them to awe by Thy divine grace. And they heard the voice of the Father bearing witness unto Thee as His beloved Son, and beheld the glory of Thy countenance, O Savior. O Word Who desirest to save all men, enlighten Thou our souls!

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode I

Canon of the Transfiguration, in Tone VIII, with 8 troparia, including its Irmos—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Moses of old, prophetically beholding the glory of the Lord upon the sea in the cloud and the pillar of fire, cried out: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

His body shielded as by a stone, Moses the beholder of God, seeing Him Who is invisible in His divinity, cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Of old Thou wast seen by Moses in darkness on the mount of the law, but now Thou art beheld in the unapproachable light of the Godhead on Tabor.

And this canon of the saint, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “Most wisely do I hymn the mighty Laurence”, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, drown Thou, I pray Thee, the three parts of my soul in the depths of dispassion, as of old Thou didst drown the mounted captains of Pharaoh; that, in the mortality of my body, as on a timbrel, I may chant a hymn of victory.

Taking delight in the garden of sweetness and joining chorus with the angelic hosts as is meet, as a warrior of Christ, pray thou that He grant effulgent radiance unto me who hymn thee, O blessed Laurence.

Entering upon the feats of honored torment, O Laurence, in steadfastness of soul thou didst show thyself to be a victorious athlete, magnificently arrayed in the crown of righteousness and the diadem of victory.

As thou wast a child of the light and of the day, thou hast shone forth upon us sensibly like the sun from the west, illumining the ends of the earth with most splendid radiance, O all-glorious ­martyr Laurence.

*Theotokion:* Delivered from the bonds of hades and corruption, and from the condemnation of the law, by thine honored birthgiving, O all-holy Virgin, we cry to thee in thanksgiving: Rejoice, O thou who art full of joy, thou saving portal of grace!

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth ineffably on Tabor, O Master.

Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Though God the Word, Thou becamest wholly earthly, uniting humanity to Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount Tabor in two natures.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

With the Cross as thy standard, thou didst valiantly array thyself against the enemy, and wast shown to be crowned with victory, O right wondrous one.

Protected by the law of Christ, as one invincible thou didst oppose the laws of the impious with courageous endurance, O most blessed one.

Strengthened by the power of God, thou didst destroy the feebleness of polytheism and didst elucidate the preëternal divinity of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Equal to the Father and the Spirit in nature, essence and divinity, and to men also, was the Word Who became incarnate of thee, O all-immaculate one.

Kontakion of the saint, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: Seeking the highest…”—

Kindling thy heart with divine fire, thou didst utterly reduce the fire of the passions to ashes, O God-bearing martyr Laurence, thou confirmation of athletes; and in the midst of thy sufferings thou didst cry out with faith: Nothing can separate me from the love of Christ!

*Ikos:* Assembling, O ye faithful, with hymns let us all honor the athlete Laurence, who shone forth in the world like a steady beacon, as an initiate of ineffable mysteries; for by his supplications we are delivered from grievous transgressions. And having cleansed our hearts, let us glorify Christ Who glorifieth him who is mighty amid sufferings and saith: Nothing can separate me from the love of Christ!

Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Having amassed heavenly riches and brought them to the poor, thou didst distribute them, and gavest thy bread also to the hungry; and thereby having acquired life incorruptible, thou didst shine forth in confessing Christ, O glorious one. Wherefore, having courageously suffered under the law, thou didst receive from God a crown for thy labors, O athlete Laurence. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone: Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded…”—

On the holy mountain thou didst show forth the lightning of the divine majesty hidden under the flesh of Thy nature, O Christ our Benefactor, shining forth upon the 1disciples who were with Thee. And comprehending Thine unbearable glory, they cried out: Holy art Thou! For though unapproachable, thou wast seen by the world in the flesh, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* From Thy flesh rays of divinity issued forth upon the prophets and apostles. Wherefore, their leaders cried aloud, saying: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Master Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by the fire, Thou didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses who chanted: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

When Thou didst reveal Thyself to Moses, Elijah and the apostles, O Master, Thou wast seen to be an immaterial fire which consumeth not the matter of the body, being One in two essences, in two perfect natures.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Seated in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, Jesus most divine hath come on a light cloud, and with His incorrupt arm hath saved those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!

For love of the Word, the servant of the Word, adorned with eloquence and spirituality, is slaughtered; and he now reigneth in righteousness with the Word, enjoying gladness and His glory.

Piously fighting off the slumber of impiety with divine vigilance, O sacred martyr of Christ, by thy martyr’s stand thou didst cut off from thine eyes the sleep which is unto death.

Protected by the true armor of piety against the proponents of the impious opposition, for the sake of the Faith thou didst utterly cast down the memory of them by thy love of morality.

*Theotokion:* Having put aside all the defilement of the primeval food, we are nurtured with the Grain of Life from heaven, Which arose from the earth of the Virgin. Let us hymn her as the mediatress of good things.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity.

O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned man according to Thine image, Thou hast shown forth Thine original beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.

United without confusion, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost disciples with awe.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* The ungodly perceive not Thy glory, O Christ; but, waking at dawn out of the night, we hymn Thee, O Only-begotten One Who lovest mankind, Thou effulgence of the glory of the Father’s divinity.

Thine eyes fixed with unwavering vision upon divine beauties, O right wondrous Laurence, Thou didst spurn all the beautiful things on earth and the cruel pangs of thy body.

Having recognized Christ, Who became a servant for us, through gifts received from the Father, and become His servant, thou didst depart unto Him through the shedding of thy blood, O all-blessed one.

O blessed one, thou didst offer thyself unto Christ as a sacred oblation and a magnificent ornament; and thou hast adorned the tabernacle of heaven where, now abiding, thou delightest in radiance.

*Theotokion:* The only-begotten Son, of the same essence and like unto the Father, of His own will became akin to men, the Most High being incarnate of thy womb, O Virgin Mother.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

How great and awesome was the vision beheld this day! From the sky the material sun shone forth, while from the earth the noetic Sun of righteousness, beyond compare, shone forth on Mount Tabor.

“The shadow of the law, grown weak, hath passed away, and Christ the Truth is manifestly come!” cried Moses on Tabor, beholding Thy divinity.

The pillar of fire and the cloud most manifestly prefigured the transfigured Christ and the grace of the Spirit which overshadowed Him on Tabor.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* I have come unto the depths of the sea, and the tempest of my many sins hath engulfed me; but, as God, lead up my life from the abyss, O greatly Merciful One.

Kindling a material fire, thou didst prepare thyself as sweet food for the King of all, Who loveth and craveth our salvation, O most glorious one.

Thou didst draw nigh wholly to the light of the ruling Trinity, and being radiant, as God’s servant, thou dost illumine those who hymn thee, O athlete.

Strengthened with divine power, lying on the heated grill thou didst endure torment for the love of Christ, enkindling thy soul with fire and spiritual dew.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Mother, thou wast the place of God’s lodging, an animate throne, the holy mountain, the ark, the divinely wrought tabernacle, and the golden candlestand.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII—

On the mountain wast Thou transfigured, and Thy disciples beheld Thy glory as they could bear it, O Christ God; that when they would see Thee crucified, they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, and proclaim to the world that Thou art of a truth the Effulgence of the Father.

*Ikos:* Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which have ever been dragged down to the earth! Be ye upborne and rise up to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that with them we may see the glory of our God, and may hear the voice which they heard from on high; for they preached the Effulgence of the Father.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Now have invisible things become visible to the apostles: the Divinity which shone forth in the flesh on Mount Tabor upon those who cry: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

The apostles were overawed with fear on Mount Tabor, marvelling at the majesty of the kingdom of God, and crying out: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

Now have things never before heard become audible; for the Son, Who was born of the Virgin without father, is borne witness gloriously by the voice of the Father, in that He is God and man, the same forever.

Being from the beginning the beloved Son by nature, Thou wast not such through adoption by the Most High, and Thou hast drawn nigh unto us without changing. Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, Who saved the children of Abraham in the fire, slaying the Chaldæans whom justice rightly overtook: blessed art Thou!

Forechosen to celebrate the Mysteries and serve the Word, thou wast shown to be a sacred vessel and oblation of the temple of heaven, chanting unto the Creator: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Covered by the law of the life which is in Christ, O all-blessed Laurence, thou didst not bow thy mind to those who imposed laws of death and corruption, but chanted: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Clad in a body as one who manifestly felt no pain, O all-blessed one, with valorous mind thou didst dare the all-devouring fire, crying out , O thou who art most rich: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou wast shown to be the noetic eastward portal of the Most High Who, in manner beyond speech and understanding, appeared to men on earth through thee, O Bride of God: the blessed God of our fathers.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy disciples, O Master, having heard Thee borne witness to by the Father, and unable to bear the sight of the splendor of Thy countenance, though it was a most firm human visage, fell face down upon the ground, crying out in fear: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou art the all-comely King of kings, the mighty Lord of all, Who ruleth in every place, the Blessed One Who dwelleth in light unapproachable. And marvelling at Thee, the disciples, Moses and Elijah cried out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The apostles, from among those on earth, and Elijah the Tishbite and Moses, from among the dead, stood before Thee, O Christ, as before the Master of heaven, the Lord of earth, the One Who hath dominion over the nethermost depths; and they chanted together: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

When they followed Thee to the exalting of the divine life from the earth, Thy chosen apostles left behind on earth the griefs which give rise to despondency, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, having received Thy divine manifestation according as they were worthy, they chanted: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* O Almighty Deliverer of all, descending into the midst of the flame Thou didst bedew the pious youths and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn the Lord, all ye works!

In thy steadfastness of mind thou wast mightier than the unbearable flame, burning as in another’s body, O blessed one, yet chanting with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Like unto the three children, thou didst quench the burning embers of the fire with the dew of divine grace, crying out and chanting: O all ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

As Christ was thine enlightenment, He girded thee about with His own might, and led thee up to Himself as thou didst piously chant: O all ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!

*Theotokion:* A rod sprung forth from the root of Jesse wast thou, and in manner past nature thou gavest rise to Christ my God and Lord, the Flower of the Godhead. Let all works bless thy birthgiving, O Virgin!

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

That Thou mayest clearly show forth Thine ineffable Second Coming, that Thou mayest reveal Thyself as the Most High God, standing in the midst of gods, on Tabor Thou didst ineffably illumine the apostles, Moses and Elijah. Wherefore, all glorify Thee, O Christ.

Come and submit yourselves to Me, O ye peoples! And ascending the holy and supercelestial mountain, let us stand immaterially in the city of the living God, and noetically behold the immaterial Godhead of the Father and the Spirit which shineth forth in the only-begotten Son.

Thou hast drawn me to Thyself with love, O Savior, and hast transformed me by Thy divine desire; but burn up my sins with immaterial fire, and count me worthy to partake of Thy food, that, rejoicing in both, I may magnify Thy mighty works, O Good One.

Canon of the Saint

*Irmos:* Eve, through weakness, abode under the curse of disobedience; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast put forth blessing for the world through the Offspring of thy child-bearing. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.

Thou didst offer thyself as a perfect sacrifice and incense pleasing unto the Master, being tried by the fire of suffering like gold in a crucible; and thou becamest a foremost adornment of the Church, O right wondrous one.

Deified by the direct vision of God and by a higher union, O Laurence, in word and by divine vision thou wast radiantly illumined by the uttermost Light. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.

Thou didst shine forth from the west like the sun, O blessed one: a great and all-glorious wonder, illumining all the Church with thy beams, O right wondrous one, and warming all with the fervor of faith. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.

*Theotokion:* The prophets, beholding figures of thy birthgiving, O all-immaculate one, were instructed thereby from afar by divine inspiration; and they proclaimed it aloud to the world. And we now marvel at the fulfillment thereof.

Exapostilarion of the feast—

O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy manifest light the light of the Father and the light of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light.

Glory…, Now & ever…: the above is repeated.

On the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “The angelic hosts…”—

Shining forth past understanding from the all-holy Virgin, O Word of God, and clothing Thyself wholly in Adam, with the divine transformation of Thy countenance, when Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor before Thine honored crucifixion, O Master, Thou didst illumine our whole nature which of old had become darkened, O Christ our God.

*Stichos:* Thine are the heavens, and Thine is the earth.

Behold, the mountain which before was gloomy and enshrouded with smoke, is now honored and holy. Christ Who of old guided Israel, as it is written, with a pillar of fire and cloud, today hath shone forth ineffably thereon more brightly than the sun, illumining all things, in that He is God.

*Stichos:* Tabor and Hermon rejoice in His name.

Now as he was conversing with the Master as a servant, Cephas beheld two men on Tabor, and he cried out: “It is good to be here! Let us fashion three tabernacles, if Thou desirest: one for Thee, O my Christ, and others for Moses and Elijah, Thy servants!” But he knew not what he said, being held fast by wonder.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion, in the same tone—

O pure and all-holy Mistress and Theotokos, deliver those who trust in thee from misfortunes, and save them from all harm who, day and night, now and always, pray to thee; and entreat thy Son, Who shone forth ineffably on Tabor, to deliver us from the coming judgment.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, 6 troparia from Ode V of both canons for the feast of the Transfiguration, including the Irmos.

