**THE 13TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST**
{{text_align=center}}

**Leave-taking of the Transfiguration of Our Lord**
{{text_align=center}}

**COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCH TIKHON,**
{{text_align=center}}

**BISHOP OF VORONEZH, WONDERWORKER OF ZADONSK AND ALL RUSSIA**
{{text_align=center}}

**AT LITTLE VESPERS**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “Lord, I have cried…,” 4 stichera, in Tone I—*

Come, ye faithful, and joyously assembling, let us bless Tikhon, the holy hierarch of Christ, the most excellent pastor, the teacher of golden eloquence, the comforter of the sorrowful, the unmercenary physician of the infirm, the new wonderworker given to Russia, who prayeth for our souls. *Twice*

Like the radiant sun hath thy memory shone upon us, O holy hierarch Tikhon, illumining those who approach thee with faith; for with the splendors of thy virtues dost thou reveal to us the light of righteousness, and with the rays of thy words dost thou enlighten us truly to know Christ; with thine intercession dost thou drive away the cloud of assailing evils, and with the incorruption of thy relics dost thou show all the radiance of immortality. Wherefore, we praise thee.

Blessing thee, we praise thee, O divinely wise father Tikhon; approaching thy shrine with love, we receive grace; for thou healest the infirm with thy touch, and dost save our souls by thy fervent mediation.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

O most blessed father Tikhon: standing now before the throne of the Lord, and rejoicing with the choirs of heaven in the everlasting kingdom, forget not us who are earthly and sorrowful; offer up supplications in behalf of the children of thy flock, for whom thou didst travail upon the earth; and for all the faithful ask might for our land, peace for the Church, steadfastness in the Faith, remission of sins and deliverance from misfortunes.

*Now and ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—*

The cloud of the law, in which Moses and Elijah stood, received the radiant darkness of the transfiguration; and, vouchsafed all-radiant glory, they said unto God: “Thou art our God, the King of the ages!”

*At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II—*

Acquiring purity of mind and being an abode of the Holy Spirit, thou didst receive the grace of the hierarchy, didst enlighten the people with the knowledge of the all-holy Trinity, and didst offer thyself up in the fire of divine love; and now, standing before the throne of God, cease not to offer supplication for us who honor thy memory.

*Stichos:* Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

Blameless was thy life, precious thy death in the sight of God, honorable the tomb which holdeth thy grace-endued body, for with miracles doth it enrich those who have recourse to thee in faith, O holy hierarch Tikhon, fervent intercessor for our souls.

*Stichos:* Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice.

O holy hierarch Tikhon, thou hast been vouchsafed the communion of the apostles, and the fellowship and joy of the righteous and of all the saints; for, emulating them in virtue and travail, thou hast been shown to share in their heavenly glory.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

Thou wast a rule of faith, O holy hierarch, and by discourse on the right Faith thou didst teach the good life; thou didst reveal thyself to thy flock as a model of the virtues, carefully observing the commandments of Christ. Wherefore, as one who kept and taught them, thou hast been called great in the kingdom of heaven, O holy hierarch. As one possessed of great boldness, entreat Christ God in behalf of those who with faith honor thy holy memory.

*Now and ever..., of the feast, in Tone II: Spec. Mel,: “O house of Ephratha…”—*

On Mount Tabor Moses and Elijah beheld God, Who had become incarnate of the Virgin Maiden, for the deliverance of men.

*Troparion, in Tone VIII—*

From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed one; and thou wast an example unto all by word, life, love, spirit, faith, purity and humility. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the heavenly mansions, where, standing before the throne of the all-holy Trinity, do thou pray that our souls be saved, O holy hierarch Tikhon.

*Or this troparion, in Tone IV—*

O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety, preacher of repentance, emulator of Chrysostom, most excellent pastor, new beacon and wonderworker of Russia: well didst thou shepherd thy flock, and by thy writings thou hast instructed us all. Wherefore, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the Chief Shepherd, do thou entreat Him that our souls be saved.

*Glory…, Now & ever… the festal troparion, in Tone VII—*

Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ God, Who didst show Thy glory unto Thy disciples as far as they could bear it. May Thine ever-existing light shine forth also upon us sinners through the prayers of the Theotokos. O Bestower of light, glory be to Thee!

**At Great Vespers**
{{text_align=center}}

*After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man…,” the first antiphon.*

*At “Lord, I have cried…,” 8 stichera: 4 of the feast, in Tone IV—*

Before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, the mountain emulated the heavens and the cloud spread itself out like a tabernacle when Thou wast transfigured and borne witness to by the Father. There were Peter, James and John, for they were to be with Thee also at the time of Thy betrayal, that, beholding Thy wonders, they might not be afraid of Thy sufferings, which do Thou vouchsafe that we may venerate in peace, for the sake of Thy great mercy.

Taking the disciples up upon the lofty mountain before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, Thou wast transfigured before them, illumining them with effulgence of power, desiring both in Thy love for mankind and in Thine authority to show them the splendor of the resurrection, which do thou vouchsafe unto us in peace, in that Thou art merciful and lovest mankind.

The mountain which before was dark and gloomy is now honorable and holy, for thereon did Thy feet stand, O Lord; for in the latter days Thou didst make manifest the hidden, preëternal mystery, Thine awesome transfiguration, to Peter, John and James. But they, unable to endure the radiance of Thy countenance and the brightness of Thy raiment, fell prostrate on the ground and covered themselves. And, seized with terror, they marvelled, beholding Moses and Elijah conversing with Thee as they stood with Thee; and the voice of the Father bore witness, saying: “This is My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased: Him do ye obey! He Will grant the world great mercy!”

Transfigured on the high mountain, the Savior, having with Him His preëminent disciples, shone forth most wondrously, showing them forth as illumined by the loftiness of the virtues and as ones vouchsafed divine glory. Moses and Elijah, who spake with Christ, showed that He hath authority over the living and the dead, and that He is the God Who of old spake through the law and the prophets. Of Him was the voice of the Father heard saying from the cloud of light: “Him do ye obey, Who through the Cross made hell captive and granteth life everlasting to the dead!”

*And 4 stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII—*

Come, all ye people of Russia, and with godly hymns let us praise Tikhon, the holy hierarch and wonderworker, the divinely radiant beacon of the Church of Christ shining in the darkness of this age, the instructor in Orthodox dogmas, the denouncer of superstitious teachings, the eloquent preacher of repentance, the true teacher of the commandments of Christ, who kept and taught them. And falling down before the shrine of his holy and much-healing relics, let us cry out to him with compunction: Illumine us with the light of thy knowledge divine, O our father; raise us up from the sleep of sin with the fear of punishment and the judgment of God; set our feet firmly on the path of Christ’s commandments, and pray thou that our souls be saved!

O divinely wise and God-bearing Tikhon, chosen vessel of grace, pure dwelling place of the Trinity, honored abode of the virtues: following Christ from thy youth, well didst thou finish thy course and didst keep the Faith to the end. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown of righteousness from Christ God, Whom do thou entreat unceasingly that our souls be saved.

Most excellent pastor, pillar and adornment of the Church, radiant boast of Orthodoxy: well didst thou shepherd the flock of Christ which the Holy Spirit appointed thee to tend, ordaining priests and instructing the people. Thou wast a defender of the oppressed, a refuge for orphans and widows, and didst provide for the poor. And now, standing before the Chief Shepherd, entreat Him that our souls be saved.

O Tikhon, our compassionate father, our ready helper, fervent intercessor before God in our behalf: by thy supplications aid thou Orthodox Christians; defend the Orthodox Church from assaults of superstition and unbelief; protect our homeland from enemies, visible and invisible; calm the whole world from the turmoil of human passions; take from us all malice, enmity and calumny; within our hearts root thou peace, love and oneness of mind, that we may be well pleasing unto the Lord and Master of our life, that our souls may be saved forever.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

Come, ye faithful, let us glorify Tikhon, the blessed and holy hierarch; for, dwelling with the angelic choirs in heaven, with the prophets, holy hierarchs and martyrs doth he join chorus, and he rejoiceth with the venerable and the righteous, contemplating Christ God not in a glass darkly, but face to face; and on earth his precious body is adorned with incorruption, pouring forth streams of healing upon those who approach with faith and love. Wherefore, we beseech thee, O holy hierarch: be thou a fervent intercessor for us at the throne of God, for thou hast great boldness before Him.

*Now and ever..., of the feast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI—*

Foreshadowing Thy resurrection, O Christ our God, Thou didst take three of Thy disciples—Peter, James and John—and didst ascend Tabor. And as Thou wast transfigured, O Savior, Mount Tabor was clothed with light. Thy disciples cast themselves upon the ground, O Word, unable to endure the sight of Thine invisible countenance. Angels ministered to thee in fear and trembling; the heavens were afraid and the earth quaked, beholding the glory of the Lord upon the earth.

*Entrance. Prokimenon of the day. Three readings:*

**Reading from the Proverbs**
{{text_align=center}}

**\(a concatenation of verses\).**
{{text_align=center}}

The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. She is more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to all that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.

**Reading from the Proverbs \(10:31-11:12\).**
{{text_align=center}}

The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; but the tongue of the unjust shall perish. The lips of just me drop grace; but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the humble will meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness shall deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth just dealing. The righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction. At the death of a just man, his hope doth not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the blessing of the upright city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.

**Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon**
{{text_align=center}}

**\(4:7-15\).**
{{text_align=center}}

Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet will he be in rest. For honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners, he was translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.

*At the Litia, these stichera, in Tone II—*

Let us praise the most blessed Tikhon, the adornment of holy hierarchs and glory of the fathers, the great adornment of the faithful, the new wonderworker who abundantly poureth forth streams of miracles, healeth the infirm, and inexhaustibly bestoweth divine gifts; and let us cry out: O most blessed Tikhon, vessel filled with grace and fount of mercy, pray to the Lord for us, that He have mercy on our souls!

O divinely wise father Tikhon, thou wast a good and faithful servant of the Lord, who didst not hide in the ground the talent given thee by Him, but, teaching and laboring, didst increase it. Wherefore, being faithful in a very little, thou wast placed over many by the heavenly Master of the house, Whom do thou entreat in behalf of those who honor thy memory with faith.

O most blessed Tikhon, thou wast a faithful keeper of the words of the Gospel, which say not to lay up for oneself treasure upon earth; but thou didst lay up for thyself voluntary poverty as a treasure in heaven, and didst abundantly provide for the poor. Wherefore, do thou now ask of the Lord for us great and rich mercy.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

Today is the Monastery of Zadonsk adorned, the flock of Voronezh rejoiceth, and the whole Orthodox Church doth celebrate, keeping thy memory, O holy hierarch Tikhon. For, in thy wonders and the incorruption of thy relics, we all have a great sign of the grace of the Holy Spirit in the Orthodox Church, a reproof of heresies and schisms, and the shaming of impiety.

*Now and ever…, of the feast, in Tone V—*

Moses the God-beholder and Elijah of the fiery chariot, who traversed the heavens without being consumed, beholding Thee, O Christ, in the cloud at Thy transfiguration, bore witness to Thee as the Creator and Fulfiller of the law and the prophets. With them vouchsafe Thine enlightenment also unto us, O Master, that we may hymn Thee forever.

*At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone III—*

Richly didst thou nourish the souls of the starving with heavenly food, for thy word is the bread of angels, O divinely wise Tikhon. With divine gladness thou didst fill the hearts of those who thirst, for thy teaching is divine wine and a wellspring of the grace of the Holy Spirit, which poureth forth life everlasting.

*Stichos:* My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

Lovingly praising thee, a hierarch and pastor guileless and venerable, and a faithful teacher, we earnestly pray: Offer unto the Lord supplication for the salvation of our souls!

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

The tares which the wicked foe sowed amongst thy flock didst thou manfully uproot. For, denouncing the shameless pagan games, thou didst abolish practices harmful to the soul, teaching all piously to keep the commandments of Christ.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Tikhon? Good shepherd? For thou wast ready to lay down thy life for thy sheep. Enthroned with the apostles? For by thy writings thou dost instruct all. Boast of fasters and adornment of monks? For monastic labors, vigils and fasting didst thou take up. Earthly angel and heavenly man? For in the world thou didst live most peaceably. Child of God? For above all else didst thou love to make peace. And now do thou beseech Christ God, that He calm the world and make steadfast the Holy Church.

*Now and ever…, of the feast, in Tone VI—*

To Peter, James and John, Thy foremost disciples, O Lord, Thou hast shown the glory of Thy divine countenance today on Mount Tabor; for they beheld Thy garments illumined as with light, and Thy face shining more brightly than the sun. And unable to endure the unbearable sight of Thine effulgence, they fell face down upon the ground, in nowise able to lift up their heads. And they heard a voice from above bearing witness, saying: “This is my beloved Son, Who hath come into the world to save man!”

*At the Blessing of the Loaves, the troparion of the saint, twice, in Tone VIII—*

From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed one; and thou wast an example unto all by word, life, love, spirit, faith, purity and humility. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the heavenly mansions, where, standing before the throne of the all-holy Trinity, do thou pray that our souls be saved, O holy hierarch Tikhon.

*Or this troparion, in Tone IV—*

O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety, preacher of repentance, emulator of Chrysostom, most excellent pastor, new beacon and wonderworker of Russia: well didst thou shepherd thy flock, and by thy writings thou hast instructed us all. Wherefore, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the Chief Shepherd, do thou entreat Him that our souls be saved.

*And the festal troparion, in Tone VII—*

Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ God, Who didst show Thy glory unto Thy disciples as far as they could bear it. May Thine ever-existing light shine forth also upon us sinners through the prayers of the Theotokos. O Bestower of light, glory be to Thee! *Once*

**At Matins**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “God is the Lord…”, the festal troparion, twice; Glory…, that of the saint; Now & ever…, that of the feast, once.*

*After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—*

A second Moses didst thou show thyself to be; for, having ascended the mount of the virtues, the dogmas of pure theology didst thou receive like tablets inscribed by the hand of God, not struck with awe by fearsome signs, but guiding the new Israel to the calm haven by the teachings of divine words.

*Glory…, Now and ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—*

Revealing the human form of Thy second and awesome coming with Thy glory, O Savior, Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor. Elijah and Moses conversed with Thee, and Thy three disciples were summoned to behold Thy glory, O Master, and marvelled at Thy radiance. O Thou Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine our souls!

*After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—*

Christ the Lord, the unapproachable Light of life, resting in thee, O holy hierarch, revealed thee to the world as a most radiant flame; for thou dost shed light by thy life, dost enlighten with the rays of thy teachings, and dost shine forth in miracles. Wherefore, we radiantly celebrate thy memory, O Tikhon most blessed.

*Glory..., Now and ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—*

Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus, and a radiant cloud, stretching forth like a shadow, covered the apostles with glory. Wherefore, they fell face down upon the ground, unable to bear the sight of the splendor of the unapproachable glory of Thy countenance, O unoriginate Savior. O Christ our God, Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine Thou our souls

*The Polyeleos, and this Magnification—*

We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father Tikhon, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God in our behalf.

*Selected Psalm verses—*

A Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. \[Ps. 48: 2\]

B My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. \[Ps. 48: 4\]

A Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. \[Ps. 33: 12\]

B I have proclaimed the good tidings of Thy righteousness in the great congregation. \[Ps. 39: 10\]

A Thy truth and Thy salvation have I declared. \[Ps. 39: 11\]

B I will declare Thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. \[Ps. 21: 23\]

A That I may hear the voice of Thy praise, and tell of all Thy wondrous works. \[Ps. 25: 7\]

B O Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth. \[Ps. 25: 8\]

A I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and with the ungodly will I not sit. \[Ps. 25: 5\]

B For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and I have not acted impiously toward my God. \[Ps. 17: 22\]

A The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment. \[Ps. 36: 30\]

B His righteousness abideth unto ages of ages. \[Ps. 110: 3\]

A Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall rejoice. \[Ps. 131: 9\]

B Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; unto ages of ages shall they praise Thee. \[Ps. 83: 5\]

Glory..., Now & ever... Alleluia... *Thrice*.

*After the Polyeleos, this sessional hymn, in Tone VIII—*

Thou didst make thy body subject to thy spirit through asceticism, setting thy mind as master over the passions; and illumining thy soul with the pangs of fasting, O holy hierarch, thou didst offer a pure sacrifice unto Christ, of Whom thou wast beloved, for thou didst love Him and wast truly the abode of the divine Trinity.

*Glory…, Now and ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up…”—*

Moses and Elijah stood before Thee when Thou didst ascend the mountain with the disciples and shine forth in the glory of the Father: for the law and the prophets serve God; and the Father, declaring Christ’s essential Sonship, called Him His Son. Him do we hymn with Thee and the Spirit.

*Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone IV—*

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

*Let every breath praise the Lord!*

**Reading from the Gospel according to**
{{text_align=center}}

**St. John, §36 \(10:9-16\)**
{{text_align=center}}

The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”

*After Psalm 50, this sticheron, in Tone II—*

Thou didst take the Cross upon thy shoulders, didst crucify thyself to the world, and didst follow in the steps of Christ the Savior; shaking off the love of life and every attachment to the passions, and shining forth in thy blessed life, thou didst receive a heavenly inheritance. Remember thy flock which doth ever honor thee, O holy hierarch, father Tikhon.

*Both canons of the feast, with 8 troparia, including the irmos of Canon I; and the canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I glorify Tikhon, the holy hierarch and wonderworker,” with 6 troparia, in Tone VIII—*

**Ode I**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone IV—*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The people of Israel, having fled across the watery deep of the Red Sea with dryshod feet, beholding the mounted captains of the enemy drowned therein, sang with gladness: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

Speaking words of life and giving instruction concerning that which is divine, Christ said to his friends: “Recognize the Father in Me, for I emit unapproachable light, unto the joy of those who chant: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”

“Ye will be invested with the power of tongues, O My friends and disciples, and will be marvellous in the richness thereof, for ye will be filled with glory. For I shall reveal Myself to be brighter than the sun, illumining those who chant in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”

Shining forth today with divine radiance on Mount Tabor, as He promised, Christ hath laid bare His countenance to His disciples. And, full of light-bearing and divine splendor, they chanted in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!

*Canon II of the Feast, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII—*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Moses of old, prophetically beholding the glory of the Lord upon the sea in the cloud and the pillar of fire, cried out: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

His body shielded as by a stone, Moses the beholder of God, seeing Him Who is invisible in His divinity, cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

Of old Thou wast seen by Moses in darkness on the mount of the law; but now Thou art seen in the unapproachable light of the Godhead on Tabor.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch, in Tone VIII—*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Same as preceding canon

O Tikhon, holy hierarch of Christ: do thou thyself grant me understanding and speech, that I may worthily hymn the glory wherewith Christ the Lord hath glorified thee.

A ray of divine light hast thou shone upon us. Come, ye children of the light, that we may be illumined thereby, that, magnifying the holy hierarch with hymns, we may become warmed by the Spirit.

Let us glorify the blessed Tikhon, the successor to the apostles, enthroned with the holy hierarchs, dweller with the venerable, by whose intercession we obtain salvation.

*Theotokion:* The Master of all, having taken flesh of thee ineffably, O Mary Theotokos, became perfect man; and when thou gavest birth, He kept thee as pure as thou hadst been before giving birth. Him do thou entreat, that He save our souls from misfortune.

*Katavasia:* Tracing an upright line with his staff, Moses divided the Red Sea for Israel which was travelling on foot; and striking it a transverse blow, he brought the waters together over the chariots of Pharaoh, thereby inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.

**Ode III**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The bow of the mighty is become weak, and the strengthless have girded themselves with power; wherefore, my heart is established in the Lord.

Having put on all of Adam and transformed the nature which of old had become dark, Thou didst illumine it with the transformation of Thine appearance and didst render it divine, O Christ.

Christ, Who of old guided Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and the cloud, hath ineffably shone forth in light today on Mount Tabor.

*Canon II of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth ineffably on Tabor, O Master.

Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.

Through God the Word, Thou becamest wholly of earth, uniting humanity to Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount Tabor in two natures.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Same as preceding canon

Wounded with the love of Christ, O blessed one, from thy youth didst thou follow Him with unwavering desire, disdaining every carnal pleasure.

The passions of youth which vex the flesh didst thou cut down with the sword of the love of wisdom, offering thyself as a sacrifice to Christ the Master.

O Tikhon, with greater love didst thou cleave unto wisdom, made steadfast in the fear of God, for it is the beginning of wisdom.

*Theotokion:* Let us hymn the divine temple of God! Let us bless the holy Virgin, deified and delivered from misfortunes by her!

*Katavasia:* The rod of Aaron is taken to be an image of the mystery, for by its budding forth it chose one priest over others; and for the Church, which before was barren, the tree of the Cross hath now budded forth, for her might and confirmation.

*Kontakion, idiomelon, in Tone VII—*

On the mountain wast Thou transfigured, and Thy disciples beheld Thy glory as far as they could bear it, O Christ God; that when they would see Thee crucified, they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, and proclaim to the world that Thou art of a truth the Effulgence of the Father.

*Ikos:* Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which have ever been dragged down to the earth! Be ye upborne and rise up to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that with them we may see the glory of our God, and may hear the voice which they heard from on high; for they preached the Effulgence of the Father.

*Sessional hymn of the saint, in Tone VIII—*

From thy youth wast thou a temple of the Holy Spirit; for, having cleansed thy soul of passions through thy faith, the grace of the Comforter doth dwell therein. Wherefore, even after thy repose, thy body hath been preserved incorrupt. Entreat Christ God that those who honor thee be delivered from corrupting passions.

*Glory..., Now and ever…: Sessional hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—*

Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O God, in the midst of the all-wise Elijah and Moses, with James, Simon and John. And Peter, who was there, said to Thee: “It is good for us to make here three booths: one for Moses, one for Elijah, and one for Thee, Christ our Master!” O Thou Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine our souls!

**Ode IV**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* I have heard of Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, how Thou wast born of the Virgin, that Thou mightest save from deception those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Forming the law in writing on Sinai, O Christ God, Thou wast manifest, borne in the cloud, the fire, the darkness and the whirlwind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

That Thou mayest confirm Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, in that Thou hast existed from before the beginning of time, Thou didst shine forth ineffably on Tabor, likewise appointing Thine ascent in a cloud.

Those who conversed with Thee as servants stood before Thee, O Master Christ; and Thou didst converse with them in the vapor of fire and darkness, and the moist whistling wind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Moses, Who of old foresaw Thee in the fire and the bush, and Elijah, who was taken up in the chariot of fire, arriving on Tabor proclaimed Thy glory, for the sake of Thy Cross, O Christ.

*Canon II of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* From Thy flesh rays of divinity issued forth upon the prophets and apostles. Wherefore, their leaders cried aloud, saying: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

O Master Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by fire, Thou didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses, who chanted: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

When Thou didst reveal Thyself to Moses, Elijah and the apostles, O Master, Thou wast seen to be an immaterial fire which consumeth not the matter of the body, being One in two essences, in two perfect natures.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Like a lamb wast thou tended by Christ; like a shepherd didst thou tend thy flock, leading them to the pasture of thy life-bearing teachings.

An initiate of the mysteries of the doctrine of Christ, thou didst illumine the people with the knowledge of Him, showing forth His truth by word and deed.

A true and faithful guard wast thou over the house of God, watching over it in deed, giving an example by thy life, and by word, for thou didst diligently instruct, and by thought, for thou didst take thought for its well-being.

*Theotokion:* Finding thee to be a haven and rampart, a refuge and hope, a protection and a fervent intercessor, the faithful have recourse to thee and earnestly cry out to thee, as the blessed Tikhon hath taught us: O all-holy Theotokos, save us!

*Katavasia:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have considered Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

**Ode V**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who separated the primal light from light, that Thy works may hymn Thee, the Creator, in light: direct Thou our paths in Thy light.

The mountains inclined themselves before Thy face; for Thou wast well pleased to accept, in Thine earthly form, the light and heavenly rays which the sun came and laid at Thy feet.

Moses and Elijah cried to the disciples who were being instructed on holy Mount Tabor: “Behold, Christ the Savior is the God Whom we proclaimed of old!”

The immutable Nature, having mingled itself with human nature, shone forth ineffably, abundantly disclosing to the apostles the light of the immaterial Godhead.

When the disciples beheld Thee, the ever-existent Effulgence, shining in the glory of the Father, O Christ, they cried out to Thee: “Direct Thou our paths in Thy light!”

*Canon II of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity.

O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned man according to Thine image, Thou hast shown forth Thy primal beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.

United without confusion, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost apostles with awe.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Same as preceding canon

O holy hierarch, Christ, Whom thou didst love, Whom thou didst desire, for Whose sake thou didst struggle, do thou now beseech in behalf of thy servants, that, being merciful, He may grant a peaceful life to all of us that honor thy memory.

Filled with faith and the love of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be as a river, abundantly watering all the land of Russia with the word of thy teachings, O blessed Tikhon.

Like a bee gathering sweet honey from quickly fading blossoms, O father, thou didst gather spiritual treasure from the corruptible world, and thereby thou dost satisfy us all.

*Theotokion:* Fill thou our hearts with gladness, O most pure and divine Maiden, who gavest birth to the Cause of joy, destroying all the grief of sin.

*Katavasia:* O thrice-blessed Tree, whereon the King and Lord was crucified, and whereby he who beguiled mankind by the tree did fall! He was beguiled by thee, when God was nailed in the flesh, Who granteth peace unto our souls!

**Ode VI**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* When I was troubled, I cried unto the Lord, and the God of my salvation hearkened unto me.

Shining forth the light which is far brighter than the sun, the Savior illumined us on Tabor.

Having ascended Mount Tabor, O Christ, Thou wast transfigured; and having cast falsehood utterly into darkness, Thou hast illumined us.

Recognizing Thee as God on Tabor, O Christ, the glorious apostles, marvelling, bowed down their knees.

*Canon II of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

How great and awesome was the vision beheld this day! From the sky the material sun shone forth, while from the earth the noetic Sun of righteousness, which is beyond compare, shone forth on Mount Tabor.

“The shadow of the law, grown weak, hath passed away, and Christ the Truth is manifestly come!” cried Moses on Tabor, beholding Thy divinity.

The pillar of fire and the cloud most manifestly prefigured the transfigured Christ and the grace of the Spirit which overshadowed Him on Tabor.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos: Same as preceding canon*

Being pure of heart, thou didst cleave unto the pure Christ; being holy, unto the Holy One; being loving, unto Him Who loveth; being meek, unto the Meek One, crying unceasingly: It is good for me to cleave unto God!

The comfort, pleasure, honor, wealth, glory and all the treasures of the world didst thou despise, soaring aloft to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the home of thy Father, where there are many mansions.

Insults, sorrows and abuse didst thou joyfully endure, mindful that there is no crown without a victory, no victory without a contest, no contest without battle, and no battle without a foe.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Lady, Mother of the Creator: thou art the joy of the heavenly hosts, the blessed helper of the human race. Pray thou that our souls be saved!

*Katavasia:* Stretching forth his arms in the form of a cross in the belly of the sea monster, Jonah clearly prefigured the saving Passion. And, issuing forth after three days, he foreshadowed the transcendent resurrection of Christ God, Who was nailed in the flesh and enlightened the world by His rising on the third day.

*Kontakion, in Tone VIII—*

Successor to the apostles, adornment of holy hierarchs, teacher of the Orthodox Church: beseech the Master of all to grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls!

*Ikos:* Having adorned thy soul with virtue and enlightened thy mind with love of wisdom, thou didst show thyself to be a good shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching it by word and writing, admonishing and instructing, giving an example of what thou didst say by thy life. Wherefore, by Christ, the Chief Shepherd, hast thou been adorned with a crown of glory in heaven, shining forth on earth in the incorruption of thy relics and pouring forth abundant streams of wonders upon those who call upon thee in faith, O divinely wise Tikhon. Pray to the Lord, that He grant our souls great mercy!

**Ode VII**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the children of Abraham trampled upon the flame of the furnace, crying aloud in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Illumined by the light of unapproachable glory on Mount Tabor, the apostles cried out to Christ: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

Enraptured by the effulgence of the divine voice, the dew-bearing cloud and the radiance, O Christ, the apostles chanted: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

When he beheld Thee in unapproachable light on Mount Tabor, O Christ, Peter cried out: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

Present with thee, the Author of life, when Thou didst cause the light of Thy countenance to shine forth, the sons of Zebedee cried out: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”

*Canon II of the Feast*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Now have invisible things become visible to the apostles: the Divinity which shone forth in the flesh on Mount Tabor upon those who cry: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

The apostles were moved to awe by fear on Mount Tabor, marvelling at the majesty of the kingdom of God, and crying out: Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

Now have things never before heard become audible; for the Son, Who was born of the Virgin without father, is borne witness gloriously by the voice of the Father, in that He is God and man, the same forever.

Being from the beginning the beloved Son by nature, Thou wast not such through adoption by the Most High, and Thou hast approached us without changing. Blessed art Thou forever, O Lord God!

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

In patience didst thou possess thy soul, O blessed one, and thou didst traverse the narrow path which alone leadeth to everlasting life, ever directing thy gaze toward the way of the Cross of Christ, the Judge of the contest, and setting an image thereof as a model for thy life.

Thy whole self didst thou surrender to the love of God: soul and body, heart and mind, memory and will, purpose, ambition, word, deed and thought didst thou consecrate out of love for God.

O blessed Tikhon, thou didst show thyself to be a father of orphans, a defender of widows, the wealth of the poor, the consolation of the sick and admonition of the wealthy, a staff for the aged, the instructor of the young, and a model of virtue for monastics.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, O Mary! Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to the Savior of the world! Be thou a haven for us who are tempest-tossed by the storm of life, a calm harbor amid the deep of sorrows, and guidance to the heavenly mansions.

*Katavasia:* The mad command of the impious tyrant, breathing forth threats and blasphemy hateful to God, cast the people into confusion. Yet the three children feared not the fury of the wild beasts, nor the roaring blaze; but, in the midst of the fire, when the dew-bearing wind blew upon it, they sang: O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

**Ode VIII**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon, consumed by zeal divine, manfully trampled the tyrant and the flame underfoot; and, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed they chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Christ, Who upholdeth all things by His hand, hath with His all-pure feet ascended Mount Tabor, whereon His face shone with radiance brighter than the beams of the sun, and showed forth those highest among the law and grace, who chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

He Who ineffably manifested Himself on Mount Tabor with unapproachable glory, the intangible and never-waning Light, the Effulgence of the Father, illumining creation hath deified men who sing: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Moses and Elijah, standing on Mount Tabor as befitteth priests, manifestly beholding the Hypostasis of the divine character—Christ Who shone forth in the Father’s glory—chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The face of Moses once was filled with glory in its appearance because of the manifestation of God; and Christ is arrayed in light and glory as in a robe, for, being light itself, He illumineth those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

The disciples, beholding Christ surrounded by the luminous cloud on Tabor, fell to the ground, their minds enlightened, and hymned Him with the Father and the Spirit, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

*Canon II*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy disciples, O Master, having heard Thee borne witness to by the Father, and unable to bear the sight of the splendor of Thy countenance, though it was a most firm human visage, fell face down upon the ground, crying out in fear: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thou art the all-comely King of kings, the mighty Lord of all, Who ruleth in every place, the Blessed One Who dwelleth in light unapproachable. And marvelling at Thee, the disciples, Moses and Elijah cried out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The apostles, from among those on earth, and Elijah the Tishbite and Moses, from among the dead, stood before Thee, O Christ, as before the Master of heaven, the Lord of earth, the One Who hath dominion over the nethermost depths; and they chanted together: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

When they followed Thee to the exalting of the divine life from the earth, Thy chosen apostles left behind on earth the griefs which give rise to despondency, O Thou Who lovest mankind. Wherefore, having received Thy divine manifestation according as they were worthy, they chanted: Ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos: Same as preceding canon*

A son of the Kingdom while yet on earth, thou didst ever yearn for the Son of God, crying out to Him: Be Thou my food and drink; be Thou the light of my soul; be Thou my surcease amid sorrows; be Thou life everlasting according to the resurrection, that I may supremely exalt Thee unto the ages!

Ever mindful of the fall of Adam, the redemption through the sufferings of Christ, the hour of death, the dread Judgment, the torment of sinners and the blessed state of the righteous, thou didst lament, setting us an example of compunction and purifying thyself aforetime for eternal glory.

Having undertaken travails in this life out of faith and piety, thou didst sweetly rest from thy labors and wast granted repose; for thou didst descend into the grave, ripening like wheat for the harvest of God at the time of the reaping.

*Theotokion:* With the hyssop of the life-creating Blood of the Lamb, Who was slain for the salvation of the world, and Who took flesh of thy most pure blood, do thou sprinkle and cleanse me, who am defiled, O Mistress, that I may be made whiter than snow by thy maternal assistance.

*Katavasia:* O children equal in number to the Trinity: bless ye God, the Father and Creator; hymn ye the Word Who came down and transformed the fire into dew; and the all-holy Spirit, Who giveth life unto all, exalt ye supremely forever!

**Ode IX**
{{text_align=center}}

*Canon I*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God came forth from thy womb, appeared on earth as a mortal, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we all magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Suddenly illumined with a new outpouring of light, the disciples, stricken with awe, looked one at another; and, astonished, they bowed down to the earth and worshipped Thee, the Master of all.

A voice of divine sound was sent forth from out of the cloud, announcing the wonder; for the Father of lights cried to the apostles: “This is My beloved Son! Heed ye Him!”

Having seen new and all-glorious things and heard the voice of the Father on Tabor, the servants of the Word cried out: “This is our Savior, the image of the Prototype!”

O immutable Image of Him Who Is, O Immovable One, unalterable Seal, Son, Word, Wisdom, Arm, Right Hand of the Most High, Power: Thee do we hymn with the Father and the Spirit.

*Canon II*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

That Thou mayest clearly show forth Thine ineffable second coming, that Thou mayest reveal Thyself as the Most High God, standing in the midst of gods, on Tabor Thou didst ineffably illumine the apostles, Moses and Elijah. Wherefore, all glorify Thee, O Christ.

Come and submit yourselves to Me, O ye peoples! And ascending the holy and super-celestial mountain, let us stand immaterially in the city of the living God, and noetically behold the immaterial Godhead of the Father and the Spirit which shineth forth in the only-begotten Son.

Thou hast drawn me to Thyself with love, O Savior, and hast transformed me by Thy divine desire; but burn up my sins with immaterial fire, and count me worthy to partake of Thy food, that, rejoicing in both, I may magnify Thy mighty works, O Good One.

*Canon of the Holy Hierarch*
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

A mediator and fervent intercessor for us before God hast thou been shown to be, O hierarch, making supplication to the Master through thy prayers. Ask thou remission of transgressions, O father, for those who faithfully celebrate thy sacred memory and magnify thee with heartfelt love.

O thou who hast been illumined with the radiance of God the Light, enlighten us who are benighted by the passions of life; and, having received of Him the authority to loose and to bind, loose thou our transgressions and vouchsafe the kingdom of heaven unto those who celebrate thy memory and magnify thee as is meet.

Mercifully accept this, our hymn of praise, which is offered up to thee with abundant fervor, from our unworthy and wretched souls, O holy hierarch, granting us withal grace abounding in compassion.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst raise up fallen Adam, O Mother of God, who gavest birth to the new Adam. Do thou also raise us up, who are fallen like Adam of old, but who fervently believe in the grace of the New.

*Katavasia:* O Theotokos, thou art a mystical paradise, which, untilled, did put forth Christ, by Whom the life-bearing tree of the Cross was planted. Wherefore, worshipping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee.

*Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Having fallen asleep in the flesh”—*

Though thou hast fallen asleep in the flesh, O holy hierarch Tikhon, yet, alive in spirit, thou dost reign with Christ in the unwaning kingdom and dost beseech Him in behalf of those who call upon thee in faith and love.

*Glory…: Another Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “I behold Thy bridal chamber, O Savior…”—*

Mindful of thee, shining with ineffable light in the bridal chamber of Christ the Bridegroom, O holy hierarch, I fain would attain unto the kingdom of heaven, but my mind is become foolish through the sleep of sin, my lamp is gone out like those of those who had no oil, the garment of my soul is befouled, and I perceive the gates of the kingdom closed unto me. But, rousing me from the sleep of sin by thy prayers, give me the oil of repentance; and covering my nakedness with the garment of the excellencies of Christ, make me worthy of the unwaning kingdom.

*Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—*

O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy manifest light the light of the Father and the light of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light.

*On the Praises, 6 stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—*

Before Thine honored Cross and suffering, taking with thee those of Thy sacred disciples whom Thou didst ordain beforehand, Thou didst ascend Mount Tabor, O Master, desiring to show them Thy glory. And seeing Thee transfigured and shining more brightly than the sun, they fell prostrate and, amazed by Thy power, cried out: “Thou art the timeless Light, O Christ, and the Effulgence of the Father, even though Thou hast been pleased to manifest Thyself in the flesh, O Immutable One!”

O Word, Thou Word of God from before time began, Who dost clothe Thyself with light as with a garment: Thou hast deigned to be transfigured before Thy disciples in brilliance surpassing the sun’s; and Moses and Elijah have stood before Thee, proclaiming unto the living and the dead that Thou art the Lord, and glorifying Thine ineffable dispensation and mercy, and the exceeding great loving-kindness whereby Thou hast saved the world, which perisheth through sin.

When Thy disciples stood before Thee, O Lord, the voice of the Father manifestly called Thee His beloved Son: Thee Who wast born of the cloud which is the Virgin, and becamest incarnate, and art transfigured upon Mount Tabor, surrounded by a cloud of light, in that Thou art of one essence and equally enthroned with the Father. Wherefore Peter, marvelling, said: “It is good to be here!”, not knowing what he said, O greatly merciful Benefactor.

*And 3 stichera of the saint, in Tone III—*

O consoler of the sorrowful, thou didst lovingly receive those who were clad in rags; thou didst visit the imprisoned; to the poor, dying of noisome diseases, thou didst give peace; thou didst console the grieving that were of low estate, for thou wast a friend of the least brethren of Christ. Wherefore, Christ hath numbered thee among the company of His friends. Him do thou beseech, that He soften the hardness of our hearts and make us quick to render help and consolation in the doing of good unto those who are needy.

O lover of peace, all abuse didst thou joyfully endure as one dumb, opening not thy mouth, forgiving all, that the offender be pacified; and thou didst show thyself to be a peacemaker for those at enmity. Wherefore, bestill our much troubling passions, destroying wrath, hatred and strife, and instructing with brotherly love and patience.

O lover of stillness, who didst set a watch before thy mouth and a door of enclosure round about thy lips, that thou mightest converse alone with the One God: prevail over the unbridled malice of our tongues, and cure us of idle and vain speech and judging, ceaselessly offering thy fervent prayers unto the Lord in our behalf.

*Glory…, in the same tone—*

O emulator of the love of the heavenly Father, in that thou art a child of love, ever abiding in love, thou didst set love above fasting. We pray thee: take thou and give to us of the spirit of thy love, and teach us to perceive our own transgressions and not to judge our brethren. For thou art able to do this, in that thou abidest in God and God abideth in thee.

*Now and ever…, of the feast, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII—*

Having taken Peter, James and John alone up upon the lofty mountain, Christ was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and His garments were as white as light. And Moses and Elijah appeared, speaking with Him, and a cloud of light overshadowed them. And, lo! a voice spake from the cloud, saying: “This is my beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased! Hear ye Him!”

*Great Doxology. Troparion of the saint; Glory…, Now & ever…, that of the feast. Litanies, and dismissal.*

**At Liturgy**
{{text_align=center}}

*On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from Ode IX of the canons of the feast, and 4 from Ode VI of the canon of the holy hierarch.*

*Prokimenon, in Tone I—*

My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.

*Stichos:* Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.

**Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews, §318 \(7:26-8:2\)**
{{text_align=center}}

Brethren: such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for His own sins, and then for the people: for this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.

*Alleluia, in Tone II—*

*Stichos:* The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his tongue shall speak of judgment.

*Stichos:* The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.

**Reading from the Gospel according to**
{{text_align=center}}

**St. Matthew, §11 \(5:14-19\).**
{{text_align=center}}

The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”

*Communion Verses—*

O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

