THE 16TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE ALL-HOLY THEOTOKOS

COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF

THE IMAGE NOT-MADE-BY-HANDS OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

FROM EDESSA TO CONSTANTINOPLE

& of the Holy Martyr Diomedes

\(for this day we also provide a Vigil-rank service for the Holy Image alone\)

At Vespers

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the Dormition, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise…”—

With what unworthy lips shall we bless the Theotokos, who is more honorable than creation and more holy than the cherubim and all the angels: the immovable throne of the King, whereon the Most High dwelt; the salvation of the world, the sanctity of God, who on her divine memorial doth richly grant great mercy to the faithful?

What hymns of awe did the apostles of the Word offer thee, O Virgin, when they all stood round about thy bier, crying out in fear: “The palace of the King departeth, the ark of sanctification is exalted, the gates are thrown wide, that the portal of God may enter into joy, unceasingly asking great mercy for the world”?

What spiritual hymns shall we now offer thee, O most holy one? For thou hast sanctified the whole world by thy deathless dormition, and hast passed over to the things which are above the world, that thou mightest comprehend the beauty of the Almighty and rejoice with Him as His Mother, O pure one, the angelic ranks and the souls of the righteous escorting thee. With them ask peace and great mercy for us.

And 3 stichera of the Image, in the same tone & melody—

With what eyes shall we mortals look upon Thine image, shining with divine light, upon which the angelic armies cannot readily gaze? For it departeth from the land of the infidel today, and cometh to the Imperial City and to pious people, at the behest of God. Kings attend upon its elevation, falling down before it with fear and faith, O Christ.

With what hands defiled by sins shall we, the earthly, touch Thine image, O Word, our sinless God, Who art inaccessible to the defiled? The cherubim cover their eyes, trembling; the seraphim cannot bear to look upon Thy glory, and creation travaileth for Thee in fear. Wherefore, O Christ, condemn us not, who unworthily kiss Thy countenance with fear and faith.

Again the divine day of the Master’s solemnity hath dawned! For behold! He Who sitteth in the highest hath now manifestly visited us in His image. The Invisible One Who is in the highest is seen by the cherubim to be circumscribed, likening Himself to that which was ineffably fashioned by the all-pure finger of the Father in His likeness. And falling down before it with faith and love, we are sanctified.

Glory..., in Tone VIII—

O Master, Who lovest mankind, great is the depth of Thy dispensation; for unto the benefit of Thy creation for generations of generations, depicting the image of Thine all-pure countenance, Thou didst send it to Abgar who desired to see Thee, Who art invisible in Thy divinity even to the cherubim, that he might see the image of Thee Who becamest incarnate for our sake, and suffered of Thine own will. And we are set afire by Thy love, which Thou hast poured forth upon us in Thy great mercy.

Now & ever…, in the same tone—

Choirs of virgins now stand mystically around the bier of the Virgin Mother today, and the souls of the righteous, surrounding it, glorify the Queen. The virgins offer their virginity to her as a gift, instead of myrrh; and the righteous offer her immaterial hymnody with their virtue. For it befitteth the Mother of God, as Queen, to be escorted with radiant royal virtues. And we, entering with them upon a pure life, go forth to the burial of the Mother of our God, blessing her together in hymns and spiritual songs.

At the Aposticha, these stichera of the Dormition, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

It is not a fiery chariot which hath translated thee from among those on earth, like the righteous Elijah; but the Sun of righteousness Himself, taking thine all-holy soul in His own hands, as immaculate, hath all-gloriously given thee rest in Himself, O pure one, and having translated thee hath settled thee in joy past understanding.

*Stichos:* Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.

Come, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us splendidly celebrate the holy repose of the Mother of God today; for, rejoicing, she hath truly committed her divine and all-pure soul into the hands of Jesus our God, Who first shone forth from the incorrupt Father and later from her own womb. And she prayeth that we be saved.

*Stichos:* The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.

O most awesome wonder! She who bore the uncontainable King in her womb is laid in the tomb. The assemblies of angels and the apostles inter her God-pleasing and precious body with fear; and uplifting it, Jesus, her Son, the Savior of our souls, hath brought it up to the heavens.

Glory..., in Tone VI—

Thou didst become incarnate as Thou didst desire, O Lord; Thou didst deign to assume our poverty, and didst show forth riches of compassion, whereby Thou hast deified me who am dust. We glorify Thee Who lovest mankind, gazing upon the image of Thy countenance. Thereby, O Savior, grant unto Thy servants entry into Eden unhindered, overlooking all our transgressions.

Now & ever…, the composition of Emperor Leo the Wise…, in Tone VIII—

Jesus, thy Son and our God, O Theotokos, confirming His two natures, dieth as a man and riseth as God; and it was His good pleasure, O Mother of God, that thou die also, lest the unbelieving consider His dispensation but a phantasm. For thou didst pass over to the land of heaven, O celestial Bride, taken up from the earth as from the chamber of thy dwelling. The air was sanctified by thy passage, as the earth was illumined by thy birthgiving. The apostles send thee forth, and the angels bear thee up. Wherefore, having buried thine all-pure body and chanted funeral hymnody for thee, they gazed in awe and said with fear: “This change is from the right hand of the Most High; for He dwelt within thee, and thou shalt not be shaken!” O all-hymned Mother, depart not from thy watch over us; for we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, and we call upon thy name, asking salvation and great mercy for thy sake.

Troparion of the Image, in Tone II—

We bow down before Thine all-pure image, O Good One, asking forgiveness of our transgressions, O Christ God; for Thou wast well pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh of Thine own will, that what Thou hadst created Thou mightest save from slavery to the enemy. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee in thanksgiving: Thou hast filled all things with joy, O our Savior, Who hast come to save the world.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The troparion of the Dormition, in Tone I—

In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, and in thy falling asleep thou hast not forsaken the world, O Theotokos. Thou hast been translated to life, as thou art the Mother of Life. And by thy supplications thou dost deliver our souls from death.

At Matins

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the Image, twice; Glory…, Now & ever…, the troparion of the Dormition.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

Thy grace was poured forth upon us, O Savior, when Thou becamest visible; and the darkness of deception was extinguished, O Unapproachable One. Wherefore, direct our steps in the light of Thy countenance, that, walking in Thy commandments, we may be accounted worthy to behold Thee, O Light unapproachable. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph marvelled…”—

The angelic armies, truly gazing upon thy repose, O pure and all-pure Mistress, blessed and most lauded Theotokos, possessing the will of Him Who was born of thee, when the choir of His disciples had gathered together, bore thine honored body to paradise with rejoicing, hymning Christ, the Bestower of life, unto the ages.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel: “The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally without beginning…”—

O Son Who with the Father art equally preëternal and without beginning, Who art invisible in essence and intangible, Thou, coming under time in Thine ineffable mercy, O Master, hast left us the sweet depiction of Thy flesh, for the salvation of our souls. *Twice*

Glory…, Now & ever…, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph marvelled…”—

Committing thy soul into the hands of Him Who for our sake became man through thee, as to Thy Creator and God, thou didst pass over to life incorruptible. Wherefore, with honor we bless thee, who alone art pure and undefiled, and truly confessing thee to be the Theotokos, we all cry out: Entreat Christ, to Whom thou hast been translated, that He save our souls.

Canon of the Dormition, with 6 troparia, including the irmos; and that of the Image, with 6 troparia.

Ode I

Canon of the Dormition, the acrostic whereof is: “Let the divinely wise hold festival”, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I—

*Irmos:* Thy sacred and glorious memory, all-adorned with divine glory, O Virgin, hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, who, led by Miriam with choirs and timbrels, hymn thine only-begotten Son, for gloriously hath He been glorified.

Let the immaterial ranks accompany thy divine and immaterial body to Sion. For the multitude of the apostles, coming together of a sudden from the ends of the earth, stood before thee, O Theotokos. With them we also glorify thine honored memory, O pure one.

The honors of victory over nature hast thou taken, having given birth unto God, O pure one; yet, emulating thy Creator and Son, thou submittest to the laws of nature in supernatural manner. Wherefore, having died, thou risest with thy Son unto everlasting life.

Canon of the Image, the acrostic whereof is: “O Savior, I honor the impress of Thy visage”, the composition of Patriarch Germanus, in Tone VI—

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory.

He Who before was incorporeal did not disdain to assume our fleshly form at the good pleasure of the Father, and hath given us His divine depiction.

The immutable Essence, the most renowned delineation of the Father, Who entered human flesh, left us His features on earth when He ascended to the heavens.

Thine inheritance, which was shaken by the deceit of the adversaries, didst thou justify, O Christ, confirming it by Thy precious sufferings and the depiction of Thy countenance.

*Theotokion:* He Who supernaturally took flesh of thy pure womb, Who bringeth all men into existence, was seen, O all-immaculate one, without leaving the place where He was before.

Katavasiae: The irmoi of the Canon of the Dormition, above.

Ode III

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* O Christ, Thou creative and almighty Wisdom and Power of God, establish the Church immovable and unshaken; for Thou alone art holy Who restest in the saints.

The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in manner transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched with their hands thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation acceptable to God.

When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark wherein the Word became flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent one through the severing of his audacious hands.

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

O Savior, Thou hast clothed the honored Church in the raiment of the virtues, moving the heart of the king to seek out Thy likeness as a defense.

The father of envy, desiring to strip the good naked and cut short their time, shamelessly betrayed them into the hands of the abominable; but he hath been reproved, plotting in vain.

David once rejoiced with splendor, dancing before the holy ark; and now he who hath received the royal scepter to govern rejoiceth greatly in the divine depiction.

Thou Who of old fashioned man in Thine image straightway formed Thyself therein in Thy loving-kindness. Wherefore, with the angels we glorify Thee Who truly assumed the immutable likeness, O Christ.

*Theotokion:* Desiring to cut off at every root the disobedience of our forefather which had sprung forth, thy Son, O pure Virgin, assumeth all humanity from thy womb.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II—

The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, who is untiring in her supplications and our certain hope in her intercessions. For, as the Mother of Life, she hath passed over to the Life Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.

*Ikos:* Guard thou my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.

Sessional hymn of the Image, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

The king of Edessa, acknowledging Thee as the King of all, Who wielded neither scepters nor armies, but multitudes of miracles at Thy word, begged that he might offer hospitality to Thee, the God-man. And in Thine image he beheld Thee, and cried out: Thou art God and Lord!

Glory…, Now & ever…: Sessional hymn in Tone I: Spec. Mel: “When the stone was sealed…”—

The choir of the divine apostles gathered together to bury thee with all honor, O most pure Theotokos; and with them the ranks of angels hymned thy repose, crying aloud with all praise. And with them we the faithful, leaping up with love, O pure one, offer thee praise with sounds of hymnody, and cry out: Rejoice, thou intercessor for those who ever honor thee!

Ode IV

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* The sayings and images of the prophets revealed Thine incarnation from the Virgin, O Christ. The splendor of Thine effulgence goeth forth unto the enlightenment of the nations and the abyss gave forth her voice to Thee with gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Behold, O ye people, and marvel, for the holy and openly manifest mountain of God is exalted on high to the mansions of heaven: the earthly heaven becometh a celestial and incorrupt habitation.

Thy death became a passage to an everlasting and better life, O pure one, translating thee from transitory life to that which is truly divine and eternal, that thou mightest behold thy Son and Lord in gladness, O pure one.

The gates of heaven were raised and the angelic choirs chanted; and Christ received the vessel of His Mother’s virginity. The cherubim lifted her up with gladness, and the seraphim glorify her, rejoicing.

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

Sweet is the sun, which lighteneth our eyes; but sweeter yet is the sight of Thy likeness, O Christ; for the sun lighteneth our physical eyes, but Thine image illumineth our noetic eyes.

The might of the Ishmaelites hath failed; for in his land the emperor wise in government hath set in his right hand the full fortification of the weaponry of the Cross.

O all ye princes and judges of the earth, with the chief bishops, hierarchs and all the people, bless ye Christ, having been vouchsafed to behold Him.

*Theotokion:* Make thou entreaty, we pray thee, O all-pure one, that thy city may be preserved unharmed by barbarian invasion; for see what the beseigers devise against it.

Ode V

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* We confess the divine and ineffable beauty of Thy virtues, O Christ; for having shone forth from eternal glory as the co-eternal and hypostatic Effulgence, incarnate of the Virgin’s womb Thou hast shone forth as the Sun upon those who are in darkness and shadow.

The choir of the apostles assembled, borne as on a cloud to Sion from the ends of the earth, to serve thee, the light cloud through whom God Most High, the Sun of righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who are in darkness and shadow.

More melodious than clarions, the God-­pleasing tongues of the theologizing men sounded forth to the Theotokos, playing a funeral hymn inspired by the Spirit: Rejoice, O incorrupt fountain of God’s life-creating incarnation which saveth all!

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

Of old a little city prepared to receive Thee, O Christ, and the coming of Thaddæus cureth its ills with the letter written in Thy hand and the divine impress of Thy countenance.

The eyes of the Lord are upon just kings, and His ears are open to the entreaty of kings wise in piety, who magnificently honor His likeness, which He Himself wrought.

*Theotokion:* Bring an end to the frequent attacks of our enemies, O Virgin, destroy their counsels, and help thine inheritance; for thou seest how we, the afflicted, are in despair.

Ode VI

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* The inner fire of the sea from the deep which giveth rise to the whales was a prefiguring of Thy three-day burial, whereof Jonah was shown to be the proclaimer; for, remaining unharmed as he was before he was sent forth, he cried: I will sacrifice to Thee with a voice of praise, O Lord!

God, the King of all, giveth thee that which transcendeth nature; for, as He kept thee a virgin during thy birthgiving, so did He preserve thy body untouched by corruption in the tomb; and He glorified thee with Himself by a divine translation, rendering thee honor as a Son to His Mother.

Truly, O Virgin, thine Offspring set thee in the Holy of Holies as the splendid candlestick of the immaterial Light, the golden censer of the divine Coal, the jar and the staff, the divinely inscribed tablet, the holy ark, the table of the Word of life.

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* Jonah was swallowed, but was not held fast in the belly of the monster; for, serving as an image of Thee, Who didst suffer and wast given over for burial, he issued forth from the whale as from a bridal chamber. And he said to the watchmen, the vain and false guardians: Ye have forsaken His mercy!

O Savior, Thou art more comely in beauty than all the sons of men: for if Thou wast bereft of form and beauty at the time of Thy passion, yet Thou didst enlighten all things and reveal the form of Thy countenance, whose likeness, depicted upon an aged napkin, hath been given unto us as a treasure.

The depiction of Thy face hast Thou now given to the new Israel as strength against the hordes of the Moslems, as of old Thou gavest the ark against the Philistines, O Christ. And it hath acquired glory; for it is not fitting to cast holy things to dogs.

Thou didst send Thine apostle unto Abgar who was ignorant of Thy heavenly kingdom, to which Thou, O Christ, hast led us up from corrupt things which drag us down, O Good One Who art unapproachable even to the immaterial cherubim; and he revealed the mysteries, that Thou didst descend even unto hades.

*Theotokion:* I am now left without the strength of Thine arm, O Savior, yet Thou hast withdrawn Thy wounding from me through the supplications of her who gave Thee birth without knowing wedlock, O Word, that I might not be left foundering in the storm of sin and barely afloat, O only Deliverer.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel: “In thy supplications...”—

O uncircumscribable Word of the Father, knowing the victorious image, uninscribed and divinely wrought, of Thine ineffable and divine dispensation towards man, of Thy true incarnation, we honor it with veneration.

*Ikos:* Persuading men of the dread mystery of His incarnation, the Lord Himself imprinteth the image of His divine manhood upon the napkin and, taking up the Prototype from the Mount of Olives, He seateth it on the throne of the Father to be worshipped by the bodiless angels; and embracing it with heart and soul, we honor it with veneration.

Ode VII

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* The divine will, opposing the shameless rage and the fire, bedewed the fire and put wrath to shame by the divinely inspired three-stringed lyre of the venerable youths, opposing the musical instruments amid the flames, chanting: O all-glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Enraged, Moses smashed the divinely wrought tablets which had been inscribed by the divine Spirit; but the Master, preserving unharmed her who gave birth to Him, hath now caused her to dwell in the mansions of heaven. Celebrating with her, let us cry out to Christ: O all-glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

On the cymbals of pure lips, with the music of a radiant heart, on the high-sounding clarion of exalted thought, clapping our diligent hands on the renowned and chosen day of the repose of the pure Virgin, let us cry aloud: O all-glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Gather ye together, O divinely wise people, for the dwelling-place of the glory of God is translated from Sion to the habitation of heaven, where is the pure voice of those who keep festival, the voice of the unutterable rejoicing of those who cry out to Christ in gladness: O all-glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* The children in Babylon did not fear the flame of the furnace, but, cast into the midst of the fire, bedewed, they sang: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!

Walking the earth, by Thy word Thou didst drive away every illness, O Word of God; yet ascending to the throne of the Father, Thou healest our illness by Thine image.

O Thou Who created all things by Thy word, and took on a form not Thine own, Thou didst leave the portrait of Thy countenance unto us, and taking it up we rejoice in gladness.

The faithful emperor, who sought the lineaments of Thy features with all his soul, received that which he sought, O Lord, his wish being the fulfillment of God’s desire.

Let us prepare our eyes for the vision of God, and let us worthily strive to see the most precious image of Christ, unto our salvation.

*Theotokion:* Humanity hath been loosed from the ancient condemnation by Thy birthgiving; for God, finding thee alone to be more spacious than the heavens, made His abode within thee, O most immaculate one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* The almighty Angel of God showed forth for the youths a flame which bedewed the venerable and utterly consumed the ungodly; and He made the Theotokos a life-creating well–spring pouring forth destruction for death and life for those who chant: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and exalt the one Creator for all ages!

With discourses the whole multitude of theologians accompanied the sacred coffin of the Theotokos in Sion, exclaiming: Whither goest thou, O tabernacle of the living God? Cease not to regard those who chant with faith: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and exalt the one Creator for all ages!

Thou goest forth, O all-immaculate one, lifting up thine hands, the hands wherewith thou didst bear God in the flesh; and as a Mother thou didst with boldness say to Him Who was born of thee: Preserve Thou forever those whom Thou hast given to me, who cry out to Thee: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and exalt the one Creator for all ages!

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* The blessed youths in Babylon, braving danger for the laws of their fathers, reviled the mindless command of the ruler, and, united by the fire which burned them not, they chanted a fitting hymn unto the Almighty: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Hoping to come upon Thee, the Lord, face to face, all the most elect people of the city arranged a wondrous greeting for Thee. The divine choir of hierarchs, leading, bore Thee on their shoulders; and drawn to Thine inheritance, O Compassionate One, Thou didst rest in the church of Thy Mother.

The mouths of innocent children sang hymns to Thee of old as Thou didst enter the city which murdered the prophets; but the iniquitous assembly of the Jewish Sanhedrin armed its murderous hand in rage against Thee. But now, the lawful city, beholding Thee coming forth as Creator, rejoiceth, receiving the image of Thy countenance.

More than Moses who beheld God and received the divinely inscribed tablets hast Thou, the honorable local prince, been magnified, who received the precious letter of the Word of God, which blesseth thee who believed in piety without having beheld any of His miracles.

*Theotokion:* The Angel of the Great Counsel of the Father, Who willed to assume the flesh, acted perfectly within thy womb, O all-pure one, and hath restored human nature which had grown old. Him do we all bless as Creator and exalt supremely for all ages.

Ode IX

Canon of the Dormition

*Irmos:* In thee are the laws of nature overcome, O pure Virgin, for thy birthgiving is virginal and death is betrothed to life. A Virgin giving birth and alive after death, O Theotokos, thou hast saved thine inheritance.

The angelic hosts were amazed, seeing their Master in Sion, bearing in His arms a woman’s soul; for as befitteth a Son, He exclaimed to her in all-pure manner: Come, O pure one, and be glorified with thy Son and God!

The choir of angels buried thy body, which had received God, gazing upon it with fear, and exclaiming with a loud voice: O Theotokos who ascendest to thy Son in the heavenly mansions, thou ever savest thine inheritance!

Canon of the Image

*Irmos:* Come, ye faithful, and with minds uplifted let us delight in the hospitality of the Master and the feast of immortality in a high place, learning from the Word, Whom we magnify, and Who hath ascended.

The mindless people spat upon Thee, O Savior, and in return for Thy benefactions audaciously did unseemly things to Thee; but we who stood afar off have been adopted through Thy sufferings.

Give aid against the enemy to pious and faithful kings, for, having acquired the standard of Thy flesh as an unassailable fortress, O Master, in it they see their salvation.

O immutable Image of the Father, Effulgence of the glory of the eternal Light, Seal of the Most High, O Word, Power and Wisdom: be Thou easily reconciled to those who theologize concerning Thee.

*Theotokion:* Through thee the Word was seen on earth in the flesh, dual in nature through the bestowal of the Godhead, O most immaculate one, but one in hypostasis, having brought the union together without confusion. Him do we glorify.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

O Christ, Thou never-waning Light, through the prayers of the Theotokos, who gave Thee birth, illumine us with the visage of Thy countenance, and count us worthy of the splendor of the saints, when Thou wilt sit to render unto each according to his works.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the Dormition, in the same melody—

O how many great things hath the Mighty One done for thee! For thou wast born of a barren woman, and as a virgin gavest birth, remaining virgin still. And even after death thou remainest aloof from death, O pure one; and without leaving the world thou prayest for the world.

On the Praises, 4 stichera of the Image, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high…”—

He Who is God in His divine Person, as the Effulgence of glory and the Image of the Father, by His divine desire and in His infinite loving-kindness made visible the image of Him in the form of a servant. There is but one likeness, as He Himself knoweth, which He wondrously formed with His divine impress in the likeness of His countenance. By its coming He hath joined a multitude of angels to men, and hath illumined the world, visible and invisible. *Twice*

Behold! God Who once glorified the face of Moses through the divine vision of His back parts, and through him sent the divinely graven law unto the unbelieving people of Israel, hath now come forth as from Egypt, coming from a foreign land to the Christian city of His new people, in the divine depiction of His dread and prototypical image. And vouchsafed to behold Him face to face, let us glorify Him.

O Thou Who reignest over all creation, accepting voluntary poverty Thou dost enrich with divinity those who have acknowledged Thy lordship; wherefore, having sent divinely written letters to Abgar, who asked for salvation and health, to him Thou didst send the likeness of Thy divine countenance. And joyously celebrating its arrival now, let us rejoice with faith, drawing forth enlightenment.

Glory…, in Tone IV—

Let the clouds let fall sweetness, and let the mountains leap up in joy over the all-glorious mighty works of Christ our God; for yesterday on Mount Tabor the light of the Godhead shone forth, assuring the preëminent disciples, and presenting Moses and Elijah with glory, bearing witness unto Him Who hath authority over the law and dominion over the living and the dead. Today, in the midst of the world, the radiant depiction hath shone forth, assuring all that He is our God incarnate, to Whom we chant: Glory to Thy love for mankind, O Christ!

Now & ever…, in Tone I—

It was fitting that the servants of the Word, who saw Him with their own eyes, see also the repose of His Mother in the flesh, inasmuch as it was the final mystery concerning her, that they might behold not only the Savior’s ascension from the earth, but also witness the translation of her who gave Him birth. Wherefore, assembled from all parts of the earth by the power of God, they reached Sion and bade farewell to her who is more highly exalted than the cherubim as she passed on to heaven. And we also, with them, bow down to her as one who prayeth for our souls.

Great Doxology. Ektenias. Dismissal. First Hour.

At Liturgy

On the Beatitudes, eight troparia; four from Ode I of the first canon of the Dormition, and four from Ode VI of the first canon of the Napkin.

After the Entrance, the troparion of the Napkin and that of the Dormition; Glory..., kontakion of the Napkin; Now and ever..., kontakion of the Dormition.

Prokimenon, in Tone IV—

O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous things.

*Stichos:* All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians, §208 \(1:12-18\).

Brethren: Give thanks unto the Father, Who hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light: Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son, in Whom we have redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins; Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by Him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by Him, and for Him: and He is before all things, and by Him all things consist: and He is the head of the body, the Church: Who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things He might have the preëminence.

or

Reading from the Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians, §173 \(3:4-11\).

Brethren: Such trust have we through Christ to God-ward: not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God; Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life. But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.

Alleluia, in Tone IV—

*Stichos:* O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy name shall we rejoice unto the ages.

Reading from the Gospel according to Luke, §48, from the midpoint \(9:51-56; 10:21-24\).

At that time, when the day was come that Jesus should be received up, He steadfastly set His face to go up to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before His face: and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for Him. And they did not receive Him, because His face was as though He would go to Jerusalem. And when His disciples James and John saw this, they said: “Lord, wilt Thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elijah did?” But He turned, and rebuked them, and said: “Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.” And they went to another village. And He turned unto His disciples, and said: “All things are delivered to Me of My Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him.” And He turned Him unto His disciples, and said privately: “Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see: for I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.”

Communion Verse—

O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy name shall we rejoice unto the ages.

At Little Compline

Commemoration of the Holy Martyr Diomedes

Canon of the Martyr, in Tone IV—

Ode I

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

As thou art illumined by the light of the three-fold Sun, O blessed one, dispel the darkness of mine ignorance, that I may hymn thy radiant memory and the amendment of thy life.

Having made thy mind hostile to the passions, O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a receptacle of the Spirit; and thou didst pour forth an abyss of healings which engulfeth all the defilement of infirmities.

Desiring endless life, O all-lauded one, thou didst hasten to drain the cup of death, which thou didst receive as a herald summoning thee to a wreath which withereth not, O invincible martyr.

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, animate city of the King, who showed forth a strange birthgiving and a divine dormition: show thy city to be unharmed by every earthquake and collapse.

Ode III

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Washing away the passions of men by thine ineffable and divine handiwork, thou hast been given by God to the faithful who honor thee, as an excellent physician and fervent advocate, O thou who art most rich.

“I hasten to the path of Thy testimonies, and emulating thy voluntary suffering, I am drawn to sacrifice myself for Thee, our one God,” the martyr exclaimed.

Summoning us mystically to a banquet today, the glorious martyr Diomedes setteth his sufferings before us as immaterial food, saying: “Come, ye faithful, and let us enjoy ourselves!”

*Theotokion:* O pure one who art full of the grace of God: deliver this, thy city, from every earthquake and collapse, for on thee doth it rely; and preserve it in peace and oneness of mind, O Bride of God.

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God,—the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin—the Prophet ­Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

In that the glorious martyr Diomedes bore the word of divine understanding in his heart, like a river he inundated the torrents of deception, and utterly drowned the might of the idols.

The most wise martyr Diomedes shone forth upon the earth like the sun with rays of the virtues and the richness of miracles, and he hath enlightened the councils of the Orthodox faithful.

Thy temple hath been shown to be healing without cost for those who have recourse unto it with faith, O all-blessed one, and a mighty rampart for the Imperial City, repelling the invasions of the alien foe.

*Theotokion:* Strange is thy birthgiving, as thine honorable dormition hath likewise been shown to be, O all-immaculate and blessed one. Thy city honoreth it, through thy fervent intercession escaping the harm wrought by the alien foe.

Ode V

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thy divine glory; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, didst contain within thy womb Him Who is God over all, and gavest birth to the timeless Son, granting peace unto all who hymn thee.

Thou wast shown to be a right wondrous martyr without shedding blood, a crowned one without enduring pangs, an excellent victor without being wounded, laying low hordes of the enemy by thy struggles, O blessed Diomedes.

Inextinguishable light shone forth upon thee, the righteous one, and gladness, its mate, followed thee, O divinely wise one, in that thou wast possessed of a righteous soul which followed all the precepts of the Savior.

The torturers who cut off thy head after thine end were struck blind; but having approached Christ with faith, their spiritual eyes were opened to radiant light, O wondrous Diomedes.

*Theotokion:* The Imperial City, having thee, the Queen and Lady, as a bulwark, doth triumph over the bestial assaults of the barbarians, is delivered from all perils, and groweth and is made steadfast, O most immaculate Mother of God

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

With the flow of thy struggles thou didst drown the incorporeal foe, and with the outpouring of thy miracles thou dost wash away the multifarious defilements of the passions, O right wondrous one.

Impelled by the breath of God, and guided by the hand of the Most High, thou didst rightly attain unto the calm harbor. Pray for us, O all-praised martyr.

The fields of the passions are destroyed by thine ineffable handiwork, O glorious one, and the horde of the demons are driven away by thy divine intercession, O ever-blessed martyr.

*Theotokion:* In thee do we boast, O Virgin, by thee are we delivered from our enemies; and trusting in thee we who hymn thee do not fear the invasion of the alien foe.

Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest…”—

Shown to be a true and invincible athlete, a heavenly initiate of the mysteries of piety and grace, O all-glorious Diomedes, having vanquished the tyrant and been revealed as a crown-bearer, thou hast been glorified with wreaths of victory.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

When thy head was severed, light shone upon the vain-minded; and the tyrant was thrown into confusion, beholding it as though it were alive. Yet being dead in mind, O all-glorious one, he did not understand how to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Thou didst cast off the vile raiment of mortality, O glorious one, and through grace didst clothe thyself in the beauteous garments of immortality. Wherefore, rejoicing, thou criest out to thy Master: Blessed art Thou, O God!

With the fire of endurance thou didst consume the flammable falsehood of the enemy, and hast been shown to be a divinely radiant star of healings, O martyr, emitting beams upon those who cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, Queen of the world, who gavest birth to Christ the King, deliver the Imperial City from corruption, earthquake and the attack of the heathen, for it chanteth: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace—then in figure, but now in deed—and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Thy precious feet didst thou direct to the paths of martyrdom, O athlete; and they now walk, rejoicing, in the land of the living, amid the sustenance of paradise, O all-wise one. Wherefore, having assembled, we honor them, hymning Christ forever.

A wreath of incorruption hath been plaited for thee who struggled steadfastly and vanquished the serpent, the author of evil, O right praiseworthy martyr; and the choir of athletes hath received thee who cried out: Hymn the Lord, and exalt Him supremely forever!

Invested with divine power, thou emittest rays of miracles, O martyr, puttest an end to sicknesses, dost release from infirmities, and dispellest evil spirits, crying: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him supremely forever!

*Theotokion:* Bowed down by the many assaults of sin, we flee to thy firm protection. Make thy servants steadfast, strengthen them against the passions, and deliver thy flock from earthquake, famine and the invasion of the heathen, O Virgin, for on thee doth it rely.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Thou didst find the reward of thy labors on high, in the sustenance prepared for thee; and making thine abode there, adorned with the beauties of martyrdom, thou delightest in the comeliness of thy Creator, O martyr, asking that those who honor thee be granted cleansing and deliverance from evils.

Thou wast shown to be a tower of the virtues, a foundation of faith, an immovable rampart, an unbreakable bulwark for the Church of Christ, O martyr, and a river of healings pouring forth torrents of cures without cost upon those who with love celebrate thy memorial, O all-glorious one.

Thou didst drive the ungodliness of idolatry from the earth, didst destroy the darkness, and wast translated to the never-waning effulgence of the radiant life, O glorious one, whose manifestation thou didst first acquire, illumined by the splendor thereof, filled with everlasting joy.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, thou truly unshakable city of God, wherein He Himself made His abode: deliver thy flock from earthquake and fall, from the invasions of barbarians, from fire and the sword of the enemy, and from every affliction, O all-pure one, by thy fervent intercession before Christ.

Stichera of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

O all-blessed one, thou hast been vouchsafed to heal sufferings, to dispel infirmities, and to drive out evil spirits through the activity of the Holy Spirit, manfully destroying the worship of the pagan Greeks by the opposition of suffering, O crownèd martyr, fellow citizen with the angels, dweller with the passion-bearers.

Thou didst wage thy struggle, didst finish thy race, and keep the faith, O glorious one, and hast departed unto God, receiving from Him the gift of miracles and the unfading wreath of victory, as an invincible martyr and heir to the kingdom on high. Pray thou for the world.

*Glory…:* On the path of Thy torment, Diomedes, adorning himself in riches, O Lord, by Thy will committed his spirit into Thy hands when he was beheaded, O Christ; and after his blessed end he became a true guide for the ungodly, who were blinded, yet all-gloriously recovered their sight through faith.

Now & ever…: Instead of a theotokion or stavrotheotokion, we chant “It is truly meet to bless thee…”.

