THE 21ST DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE ALL-HOLY THEOTOKOS

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE THADDÆUS,

& THE HOLY MARTYR BASSA & THOSE WITH HER

AT VESPERS

On “Lord, I have cried…”, 6 stichera: 3 for the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

O blessed Apostle Thaddæus, having drawn nigh to the uttermost Light, thou didst truly become a secondary luminary by divine communion thereof; and, destroying the night of polytheism, thou hast led men’s souls to the Almighty. Wherefore, rejoicing and glorifying Christ, we honor thy radiant memory, luminous and harmonious.

O blessed and God-pleasing Thaddæus, after the divine and radiant resurrection of Christ and His all-holy ascension into heaven, thou didst engage in the preaching of God for the city of Edessa; and by thy words and miracles didst confirm in the truth Abgar, the local ruler, and all with him.

O blessed and divinely wise Thaddæus, by thy divine touch thou didst impart the gift of sight to the blind, the ability to walk to the lame and health to the infirm, strength to the paralyzed, and saving understanding to the ignorant; for thou wast full of the gifts of the all-accomplishing Spirit, O thou who art most rich. Wherefore, we hymn thee.

And 3 stichera of the martyr, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign…”—

Thou didst endure the suffering of many torments, O most lauded one; and having approached them with might, thou wast translated therefrom to rest without pain, to never-waning effulgence, to radiant joy, to everlasting and divine delight. Wherefore, we bless thee and celebrate thy holy solemnity today, O God-pleasing sufferer.

When thou wast cast into the sea after various and greatly painful torments, God, the Savior of all, saved thee who by His divine power trampled down the might of the alien one, O much suffering Bassa. Hence thou hast enlightened the minds of the pious, having wrought signs past understanding and comprehension.

Lifting up thy voice in the meadow of beauteous martyrdom like a sweetly melodious bird, thou didst summon thy comely nestlings, with them escaping the snare of deceit, O divinely wise and right wondrous Bassa. And with them hast thou made thine abode among the beauties of heaven, O all-blessed one, ever praying for us all.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VI—

Come ye, let us celebrate the universal dormition of the most immaculate Theotokos; for today the angels celebrate the honored repose of the Mother of God and call us mortals to gladness, that we may cry out with never-failing voices: Rejoice, O thou who hast been translated from earth and made thy habitation in the mansions of heaven! Rejoice, thou who hast brought together the choir of the disciples on light clouds! Rejoice, our hope and salvation; for we, the Christian race, unceasingly bless thee!

At the Aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree…”—

Come, ye bearers of lamps, and with sacred hymns and cymbals let us all honor the greatly lauded dormition of the Theotokos and Mother; for she is translated from the earth, and maketh her abode and dwelleth with glory in the immaterial habitations, beholding the beauty of God, and pouring forth grace upon all who honor her memory with faith.

*Stichos:* Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.

The sacred choir of the apostles hath gathered together from the ends of the earth, O Mistress, on the dew of divine clouds, to bury thy precious, God-pleasing and incorrupt body. Wherefore, the armies of heaven, invisibly surrounding thy bier, chanted with hymns unto thee: Rejoice, O new ark of holiness!

*Stichos:* The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.

All thy dread mysteries are unapproachable, all are truly ineffable; for thou wast the Mother of God, hast made the heavens beautiful, hast enlightened the world and perfumed all with thy divine memory. Wherefore, the nations call thee blessed and bless thee: Rejoice, O new ark of holiness!

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in Tone VIII—

Today the choirs of virgins stand mystically around the bier of the Virgin Mother, and the souls of the righteous, surrounding them, glorify the Queen. The virgins offer their virginity instead of myrrh; and the righteous offer immaterial hymnody and virtue; for it is fitting that the Mother of God, as Queen, be accompanied by radiant royal virtues. And having led a pure life with them, let us go forth to the burial of her who is the Mother of our God, blessing her together with hymns and spiritual songs.

Troparion of the apostle, in Tone III—

O holy Apostle Thaddæus, entreat the merciful God, that He grant remission of transgressions to our souls.

Glory…, Now & ever…, troparion of the feast, in Tone I—

In thy nativity thou didst preserve thy virginity, and in thy dormition thou didst not abandon the world, O Theotokos. Thou passest over unto life, in that thou art the Mother of Life; and by thy supplications thou dost deliver our souls from death.

AT MATINS

At “God is the Lord…”, the troparion of the feast, twice; Glory…, that of the apostle; Now & ever…, that of the feast, again.

After the first chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before…”—

At the command of thy Creator, Who was born of thee, the apostles were assembled on clouds to behold thy repose. Wherefore, they buried thee with glory and great gladness, hymning the all-pure body of thy blessedness, O Mother of Christ our God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

After the second chanting of the Psalter, this sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marvelled…”—

The choir of the apostles, scattered over the face of the earth, assembled in Sion to send the Theotokos from earth to the Most High, to Whom she had given birth. The hosts of heaven made haste on high, receiving the Mother of God who hath dominion over things visible and invisible.

Glory…, Now & ever…: The foregoing is repeated.

Ode I

Canon of the feast, with 6 troparia, including its irmos, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV—

*Irmos:* I will open my mouth, and with the Spirit will it be filled; and I shall utter discourse unto the Queen and Mother, and shall appear, keeping splendid festival; and, rejoicing, I will hymn her wonders.

O virgin maidens, with Miriam the prophetess raise ye now a hymn of parting! For she who alone is Virgin and Mother of God is translated and received into heaven.

The divine mansions of heaven received thee as an animate heaven, as is meet, O all-pure one; and thou hast taken thy place as a bride, splendidly adorned, before thy King and God, O most immaculate one.

Canon of the apostle, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the wise and divinely eloquent Thaddæus”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

Standing before the throne of the Master, O all-wise Thaddæus, bestow enlightenment upon me, that I may hymn thy radiant solemnity.

The immemorial Light within time, the Transcendent One Who manifested Himself among us, hath left thee as a beam to enlighten the world, O blessed one.

He Who is invincible in might, having girded thee about with power, strengthened thee to destroy all the might of the deceiver.

*Theotokion:* O Mistress, all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, thou hast been shown to be the one who ineffably gave birth to Him Who hath dominion over all creatures.

Canon of the martyr, with 4 troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer up thy struggles, O honored Bassa”, the composition of Joseph, in the same tone—

*Irmos:* Having traversed the water as though it were dry land, and escaped the evil of Egypt, the Israelite cried aloud: Let us chant unto our Deliverer and God!

O blessed one, pray thou that enlightenment and forgiveness of soul-destroying offenses be bestowed from heaven upon me who joyfully praise thy most glorious memory.

Thy soul, guarded by the fear of the Lord, did not fear the commands which were abominable to God, nor divers wounds and tribulations. Wherefore, thou didst brave them manfully.

With thy three sons, O passion-bearer, thou didst patiently undergo multifarious torments; and with them thou didst weave wreaths of incorruption, glorifying the Trinity.

*Theotokion:* Without the pangs of motherhood thou didst conceive the Word of the Father, O all-holy one; and thou didst give birth to Him in manner past recounting, for our salvation.

Ode III

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* O Theotokos, thou living and abundant fountain: in thy divine glory establish those who hymn thee and spiritually form themselves into a choir; and vouchsafe unto them crowns of glory.

Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.

At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy burial as was meet, O Mistress.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

Enlightening the people with the splendor of divine grace, O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a pure light for those in the darkness of evil.

Going to King Abgar, O wise one, by divinely efficacious gestures thou didst bring him healing and deliverance.

Thou didst build churches for the all-accomplishing Spirit, O wise one, and didst destroy the vile temples of mortals.

*Theotokion:* The foreshadowings of the law and the voices of the prophets told of thine awesome birthgiving as revealed by God, O Mistress.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* O Lord, Fashioner of the vault of heaven and Creator of the Church: establish me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, confirmation of the faithful, Who alone lovest mankind.

Set afire by faith and the fervent desire for the surpassing love of Christ, O most lauded one, by the presence of an angel thou didst quench the fire and didst straightway utterly consume the ignorant people.

Blessed now hath been the generation of the righteous, which shone forth from thy womb with the splendor of sufferings and destroyed the darkness of the opposition of the iniquitous by steadfastness of mind, O all-glorious Bassa.

O mother transcending the transitory law of nature, who endured an undeserved death as she watched those whom she had nurtured on faith and milk as they, in unity surpassing nature, were variously tortured!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate Virgin who once gavest birth to the hypostatic Life, thou hast saved me who have been slain by eating of disobedience. Wherefore, as is meet we now bless thee, the ever-blessed one.

Kontakion of the apostle, in Tone IV—

The Church, ever enlightened by thy miracles, hath acquired thee as an all-radiant star, O Apostle Thaddæus. Save those who with faith honor thy memory.

Sessional hymn of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom…”—

Approaching the noetic Sun, thou didst receive mystic rays therefrom, and wast like an all-radiant star, illumining the fullness of all the earth and destroying the darkness of deception, O blessed one. Wherefore, we celebrate thy light-bearing memory, praising thee with faith, and together we cry out to thee: O Apostle Thaddæus, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love honor thy holy memory.

Glory…: sessional hymn of the martyr, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior…”—

With the dew of the Spirit thou didst quench the fire of torments, O honored one, and didst pass over to the divine and immaterial Light; and even after thy death thou dost blessedly pour forth drops of healing, dissipating the heat of the passions with the power of the Spirit.

Now & ever…: sessional hymn of the feast, in the same tone & melody—

The most honored choir of the all-wise apostles assembled to bury thine all-pure body with glory, O most lauded Theotokos. With them a multitude of angels chanted, praising with honor thy repose, which we celebrate with faith.

Ode IV

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Perceiving the inscrutable counsel of God — the Incarnation of Thee, the Most High, from the Virgin — the Prophet ­Habbakuk cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gave birth to Him without knowing wedlock, refuse burial?

At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Possessed of an exalted intelligence, O Thaddæus, disciple of the King of all, thou didst receive divine understanding and spiritual gifts.

In teaching the divine mysteries, O blessed one who art most rich, thou didst enlighten the uninstructed to worship the consubstantial Trinity.

Thou didst engrave the law of God upon men’s hearts, O blessed one, having first erased the traces of ignorance and the false worship of graven images.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the Creator, thou wast shown to be the Queen of all creation. Wherefore, O Theotokos, only Ever-virgin, we glorify thee.

Canon of the Martyr

Same irmos as for the preceding canon

Being of undivided mind, thou didst set forth to do battle with the false opponent, and didst drown him in the abyss of thy blood.

The deep, receiving thee who wast condemned to an undeserved death, grew calm and saved thee, O passion-bearer Bassa, at the behest of God.

With thy right laudable sons thou didst inherit the unshakable kingdom, the truly heavenly bridal-chamber and the never-waning light, O glorious one.

*Theotokion:* Of old, Habbakuk foresaw thee as an unquarried mountain, O Virgin; for God appeared through thee and hath saved us.

Ode V

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* All things are filled with awe at thine honored dormition; for thou, O Virgin who hast not known wedlock, hast passed from earth to the everlasting mansions, and to never-ending life, bestowing salvation upon all who hymn thee.

Let the clarions of the theologians trumpet forth today, and let the eloquent tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, and let the angels hymn the dormition of the all-pure Virgin.

It was fitting for thee, O most lauded Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, which is wholly marvelled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* O Lord Who by divine knowledge brought the ends of the earth into the light out of the night of ignorance, enlighten me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.

Bearing the divine likeness of the Master, O blessed one, thou didst come as a divine physician to Abgar, the local king.

After the divine ascension of the Word, the sacred Thomas sent thee as a preacher to those in need, O all-wise Thaddæus.

Beholding his illness dispelled and his heart healed, Abgar was filled with divine enlightenment through thy mediation.

*Theotokion:* Thou gavest birth to the incarnate Word Who bore a twofold activity, O Maiden who knewest not wedlock, and didst remain a Virgin undefiled.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Held fast by a thirst for the love of Christ, O glorious and divinely blessed Agapius, thou didst hate wickedness utterly and didst mightily endure the pangs of tortures and bodily death by a spear.

When thine internal organs were rent apart and the nails torn from thy members, O martyr Theognius, thou didst repeatedly proclaim the God of all with purity and perfection. And to Him thou didst ascend in glory, shining with the splendors of martyrdom.

Having come before the tribunal of the unbelievers with unwavering faith, O all-wise, faithful and blessed Pistus, thou didst astonish the hearts of the ignorant when thy bones were broken and all the members of thy body were severed.

*Theotokion:* Now hast thou set aright the fall of Eve, our first mother, having given birth unto the Deliverer, Savior and Creator of all, O Mother of God who alone art blessed among women. Wherefore we, the faithful, glorify thee.

Ode VI

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Celebrating this divine and most honored festival of the Mother of God, come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands and glorify God Who was born of her.

From =check=thee did Life shine forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity. How, therefore, hast thine all-pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death?

As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Thou didst cause Jonah to sojourn alone within the sea monster, O Lord. Save me, who am caught in the nets of the enemy, as thou didst save him from corruption.

The enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, which dwelt within thy heart, O Thaddæus, made of thee a true luminary for the world, dispersing the darkness of falsehood.

Bearing in thy flesh the saving wounds of Christ as an adornment, O wise Thaddæus, thou didst deliver the people from all ugliness and wast taken up into most beauteous joy.

Thou didst reveal to us the morning Sun of righteousness, O glorious Thaddæus, showing those mortals who have been illumined thereby to be children of the noetic Light.

*Theotokion:* For us thou hast given birth to a Babe Who is consubstantial with the Father, and Who hath elevated corrupt human nature again to its pristine beauty, O pure one.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Thou didst reduce the pedestals of the abominable gods utterly to dust, rooting thy soul in the unutterable love of God, O passion-bearer Bassa, and hast become a dweller with the angels.

Following Christ, thou didst pass through great struggles, O martyr, and didst receive great rewards from Him therefore: immortal fame, a divine dwelling-place, and nourishment which is not transitory.

God, Who is wondrous in thee and is ever glorified in the councils of the saints, saved thee by His omnipotent power, O all-lauded one, as of old He saved Jonah from the depths of the sea.

*Theotokion:* The depths of sin and waves of despair beset my mind; but take pity, extend thy hand to me, and save me, O Mistress who gavest birth to the Savior.

Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II—

The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, who is untiring in her supplications and our certain hope in her intercessions. For, as the Mother of Life, she hath passed over to the Life Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.

*Ikos:* Guard thou my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.

Ode VII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The divinely wise youths worshipped not a creation rather than the Creator, but, manfully trampling the threat of the fire underfoot, they rejoice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!

Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with Him!

The most sacred repose of Thy divine and incorrupt Mother hath united the celestial ranks of the exalted hosts to rejoice with those on earth, chanting unto Thee: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, but, bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, they chanted a hymn, saying: O supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Performing miracles through the invocation of Christ Who manifested Himself in bodily matter, O all-praised one, thou didst draw to the excellent Faith people and cities, who cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Thou didst halt the decay of ungodliness, O blessed apostle, with the divine salt of thy sweet words, and didst heal hearts wounded by the darts of the serpent, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Caught up to the heights of vision and filled with the divine Spirit, O Thaddæus, thou wast divinely enriched by the saving Word and didst teach men to cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

*Theotokion:* Stumbling in my character, and covered myself with unseemly deed, I flee to thee. Help me, O Mistress, providing my lowly soul with models of repentance, that I may glorify thee.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the youths who had come forth from Judæa trod down the flame of the furnace with their faith in the Trinity, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Passing unconsumed through the flame of the fire by divine power, O martyr, with the fire of thy blood thou didst utterly consume falsehood as though it were kindling, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

O Master Who restrained the raging of the lions in the pit, saving Thy Daniel, Thou didst show the martyr to be unharmed by the wild beasts; and she chanted unto Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

Illumined with the radiant beams of the Cross, O glorious Bassa, thou didst pass through the darkness of deception unharmed and didst issue forth into the Light, crying out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!

*Theotokion:* Thou hast rent asunder the tangled bonds of mine offenses, O Bride of God, having given birth unto God, Who taketh away the sin of the world, in manner past recounting, O blessed, pure and ever all-glorious one.

Ode VIII

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* The birthgiving of the Theotokos saved the pious children in the furnace — then in figure, but now in deed — and it moveth all the world to chant to Thee: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; and we, the race of men, hymn and exalt it supremely for all ages.

He Who, in manner strange, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and exalt thee supremely for all ages, O Virgin.

O the wonders of the Ever-virgin and Mother of God, which pass understanding! For, taking up her abode in the grave, she hath shown it to be paradise; and standing before it today, rejoicing, we chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Becoming vanquishers of the tyrant and the flame by Thy grace, taking exceeding care to keep Thy commandments, the children cried out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!

Thou wast shown to be a heaven declaring the glory of God, O Thaddæus, and wast the enlightenment of the nations, leading to the divine Faith those who fervently cry: Hymn ye the Lord and exalt Him supremely forever!

Bestowing strength upon the infirm, sight upon the blind, and the ability to walk upon the lame through the power of the Spirit, O blessed Thaddæus, thou wast a luminary of the city of Edessa, which ever praiseth thee with faith.

Thaddæus, who by a wealth of miracles brought an unbelieving nation to the Faith at the behest of God, and saved those who fled to him from the falsehood of idolatry, is glorified with faith, as is meet.

*Theotokion:* The shadow of the law passed away when thou gavest birth to the Bestower of the law Who illumineth the whole world with grace, O Mistress. Him do thou ever entreat, that He quickly have pity on me who am overcome by the law of sin.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

He Who clad Himself in our weakness manifestly strengthened thy weak nature and rendered thee more powerful than the fire, the water, the wild beasts and the instruments of the torturers, O martyr; and thou didst cry out with faith: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Contending as youths, the godly Theognius, the sacred Agapius, together with Pistus, the honored children, manfully vanquished the opposition of the adversary, showing themselves forth in word and deed; and, having received crowns of victory from God, they exalt Him supremely for all ages.

Like an exceeding fruitful olive-tree, like a heavy-laden vine replete with three branches, O Bassa, with them thou didst produce the grapes of confession, pouring forth the wine of witness which gladdeneth the hearts of those who piously cry: Ye people, exalt Christ supremely forever!

Standing around the throne of God with the ranks of the incorporeal ones and the armies of the martyrs, O all-praised ones, and full of glory, grace and enlightenment, dispel the darkness of the offenses of us who with faith celebrate your luminous, divine and excellent memory, which is full of spiritual gifts.

*Theotokion:* The only Merciful One, the Word of the Father, Who formed the heavens with His gesture and the earth with His will and fashioned man, manifestly took flesh of thee for Himself, that He might restore our corrupt nature which had been brought to ruin by the deception of the serpent, O Virgin.

Ode IX

Canon of the Feast

*Irmos:* Let every mortal leap for joy, enlightened by the Spirit; and let the nature of the incorporeal intelligences keep festival, honoring the sacred feast of the Mother of God, and let them cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!

Come ye to Sion, the divine and fertile mountain of the living God, and let us behold the Theotokos; for Christ hath translated her, as His Mother, to the Holy of Holies of a far better and divine tabernacle.

Come, ye faithful, let us approach the tomb of the Mother of God and kiss it with hearts and lips, touching to it your eyes and faces, and drawing gifts of abundant healings from the ever-flowing fountain.

Accept from us a hymn of parting, O Mother of the living God, and with thy light-bearing and divine grace overshadow us, granting victory to Orthodox hierarchs over heresies, and forgiveness to all Christian people who hymn thee, and salvation to their souls.

Canon of the Apostle

*Irmos:* Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, we confess thee to be in truth the Theotokos, magnifying thee with the incorporeal choirs.

Drawing nigh to behold the divine rewards which are everlasting and the uttermost desires, O blessed Thaddæus, adorn thyself and dance!

Like a cedar, like a mighty cypress-tree, wast thou exalted by the virtues, O glorious Thaddæus, perfuming the hearts of those who praise thee.

Joining the apostles and martyrs, and sharing the gladness of the choirs of the incorporeal ones, O blessed one, pray thou with them, that they who honor thee may be saved.

Thy memory, illumining the thoughts of the faithful with the rich radiance of spiritual gifts, O Thaddæus, impelleth all to praise thee.

*Theotokion:* O right-beloved Virgin who gavest birth to the all-good Word, bless thou my soul, which hath been vexed by sins.

Canon of the Martyr

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

Desiring to see what earthly eye hath truly never seen, illumined with immaterial radiance, thou didst manfully endure the painful crushing of the members of thy body, the onslaughts of wild beasts, the burning of fire, and the raging of the sea, O all-praised and most blessed one.

Thou didst truly shine forth like a radiant, magnificent and God-bearing moon of divine aspect, set among the shining stars of grace with those who issued forth from thy womb. And now, O blessed ones, illumine ye the whole world with immaterial splendor.

Having established thoughts of heavenly ascent upon the rock of endurance, O blessed ones, ye were truly shown to be unaffected by the trials of multifarious torments; and receiving the trophy of victory from Christ, ye have been counted worthy to reign with Him, rejoicing forever.

Like a truly chaste dove, like a turtle-dove who loved God, like a swallow on the wing with thy godly nestlings, thou hast made thine abode in the heavens, the divine and noetic realm, fleeing the winter and the pursuit of the demons, O Bassa, whom with love we call blessed.

*Theotokion:* Having given birth to the Deliverer Who loveth mankind, O wondrous and right loving Mistress, grant deliverance from sins to me by thy supplications; bless my soul which hath been oppressed by wicked thoughts, O most honored one; and show it forth as free from deadly passions, O most immaculate one.

Exapostilarion of the apostle: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—

Having been anointed a luminary for Edessa, O most wise Thaddæus, therein thou didst proclaim the divine dispensation of the Word; and having enlightened the local ruler Abgar and all with him, thou didst show them to be servants of the all-radiant Trinity, O apostle, preacher of God.

Glory…, Now & ever…: Exapostilarion of the feast—

O thy mysteries, O pure Theotokos! For thou hast been shown to be the awesome throne of the Most High, greater than the cherubim, whereon He, the Author of creation, sat and revealed Himself. And having now passed over to Him, do thou protect the world and keep it safe.

At the aposticha, these stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha…”—

Be thou mindful of those who earnestly beseech thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and who honor with love thy sacred dormition.

*Stichos:* Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.

The tomb of the all-pure Theotokos is a stairway to heaven, leading up those who hymn her divine dormition.

*Stichos:* The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.

The kingdom of the Most High, the glory of the elect, receiveth thee, O Virgin, thou Bride of God, who goest to thy Son.

Glory…, Now & ever…, of the feast, in the same tone & melody—

Chant, all ye choirs of heaven, for the Virgin Mother hath most gloriously been translated from earth to the heavens.

AT LITURGY

On the Beatitudes, 6 troparia, from Ode VII of both canons of the feast, including the irmos of the first.

