**THE 24TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST**
{{text_align=center}}

**COMMEMORATION OF THE HIEROMARTYR EUTYCHES,**
{{text_align=center}}

**THE DISCIPLE OF SAINT JOHN THE THEOLOGIAN**
{{text_align=center}}

**AT VESPERS**
{{text_align=center}}

*At “Lord, I have cried…”, these stichera of the saint, in Tone VIII: Spec, Mel.: “O all-glorious wonder…”—*

O blessed martyr Eutyches, having been taught the word of God in sacred manner by the honored disciple, the preacher of divine eloquence, thou didst learn from him every sacred doctrine, and wast shown to be a light, illumining every thought with grace through thy sacred theology. Wherefore, we honor thy holy memory.

Thou didst cast down the fortress of delusion, O thou who art most rich, by thy steadfast struggle of endurance, by thy wounds and stripes and thy glorious death. Wherefore, thou hast received immortality, making thine abode with the choirs of the martyrs and with the ranks of the angels, being well and perfectly deified in godly manner by a higher communion.

Imprisoned in a dungeon, thou didst receive the Bread of life from heaven, O glorious one; and, cast into the flame, thou didst remain unconsumed. Lacerated with wounds cruelly inflicted, thou didst tame the raging of the wild beasts by thy prayers. By the sword was thy head severed, and thou wast drawn up to the heavens, as on a divine chariot.

*Glory…, Now & ever …: Theotokion—*

Save me, O all-pure Mistress, who gavest birth ineffably unto Christ the Savior. For thee have I acquired as mine only intercessor, an unassailable rampart, my protection and joy, and the divine consolation of my soul. Wherefore, deliver me from the worm which sleepeth not and from everlasting fire, O Mother of Christ God.

*Stavrotheotokion—*

“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, O Master? Thou Who sustainest all creation, lifted up upon the Tree, diest, granting life unto all!” the Theotokos said, lamenting, when she beheld the God and man Who shone forth ineffably from her suspended upon the Cross.

*Aposticha from the Octoechos.*

*Troparion, in Tone IV—*

As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles and didst occupy their throne, thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to the vision of God, O divinely inspired one. Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, thou didst suffer for the Faith even to the shedding of thy blood, O hieromartyr Eutyches. Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

**At Matins**
{{text_align=center}}

*Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the saint, with 4 troparia, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII—*

**Ode I**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* The staff of Moses, once working a wonder, striking the sea in the form of the Cross and dividing it, drowned the mounted tyrant Pharaoh, and saved Israel who fled on foot, chanting a hymn unto God.

As thou dwellest together with the apostles and the martyrs, and art ever full of divine radiance, O right glorious martyr Eutyches, show forth those who celebrate thine honored feast today as partakers of the light.

As a disciple of the beloved disciple, O blessed one, who didst with piety greatly emulate his ways, thou didst love the Lord, observing His divine laws; and thou didst emulate also His sufferings, O Eutyches.

Piously submitting to the law of God, thou didst mortify thy flesh with the pangs of fasting, withdrawing from the world and abiding in the mountains, O glorious martyr; and, having cleansed thy soul, thou art known to be godly.

*Theotokion:* In thee, O Virgin, have I placed the hope of my salvation. Cleanse me wholly of the defilement of sin, and make me pure and eminently well-pleasing to thy Son, and able to do His most holy will.

**Ode III**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* O Christ, Who in the beginning established the heavens in wisdom and founded the earth upon the waters, make me steadfast upon the rock of Thy commandments; for none is holy as Thee, O Thou Who lovest mankind.

Like a great star illumining men’s hearts with the Spirit, O blessed and divinely wise one, thou didst seek out Paul, to travel with him, as with the sun shining with the light of preaching most wise.

John, the faithful friend of the Savior, the foundation of theologians, eminent among the disciples, when he was divinely translated from the earth, entrusted to thee the flock of God, to shepherd it.

All-comely, radiant and full of the Spirit of God, thou didst stand before him who sat in judgment unrighteously, denouncing his impiety, O thou who art most rich; and thou didst confess the divine humanity of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Rejoice, thou who alone gavest birth ineffably to Joy! Rejoice, chariot and cloud of the Word! Rejoice, O Mother of God, Virgin who hast not known wedlock! Rejoice, glory of the venerable! Rejoice, crown of the martyrs!

*Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith…”—*

Emitting the effulgence of divine knowledge, thou didst dispel the darkness of polytheism, finishing thy race in martyrdom. And thou pourest forth gifts of healing and dost wash away the ailments of those who have recourse unto thee. O glorious martyr, entreat Christ God, that He grant our souls great mercy.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, surpassing the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications, cleanse me, who more than all others am dust and am defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure one, granting me great mercy.

*Stavrotheotokion—*

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who had sprung forth from her painlessly, suspended upon the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is that thou dost suffer voluntarily, desiring to deliver man from the dishonor of the passions?”

**Ode IV**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Thou art my strength, O Lord, Thou art my power; Thou art my God, Thou art my joy, Who, without leaving the bosom of the Father, hast visited our lowliness. Wherefore, with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Thou Who lovest mankind!

Departing with all thy mind unto the Lord, thou didst not feel thyself cruelly beaten and lacerated; and like sweet-smelling incense thou didst fill all who stood by with divine fragrance through the action of the Spirit, O right glorious and divinely wise one.

Preserved by God while imprisoned, bound, in the dungeon, O divinely wise martyr, rejoicing thou didst manifestly receive the Bread of heaven, God, the sole Judge of the contest, strengthening thee, O God-bearing Eutyches; and thou didst emulate His divine sufferings.

Standing before the tribunal of the tyrants, thou didst open thine honored mouth and with the Spirit didst clearly explain the true Faith in the Trinity. And thou didst denounce the delusion of idolatry and the reasoning of the ungodly tormenters, O blessed one.

Aflame with love for God, O blessed one, after sustaining many other wounds on thy body thou didst pass, rejoicing, through the consuming flame of the fire, in nowise daunted by the threats of the tyrant; for a divine dew from heaven came down upon thee, O Eutyches.

*Theotokion:* Alone among women, thou wast virgin both before and after giving birth; for God, Who was on high before time began, was ineffably incarnate of thee and was born on earth in the latter days, renewing nature in manner past understanding, O most immaculate one.

**Ode V**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Wherefore hast Thou turned Thy face from me, O Light never-waning? And why hath a strange darkness covered me, wretch that I am? But turn me, and guide my steps to the light of Thy commandments, I pray.

Made rich by the divine Word, thou didst give unto all who asked, O martyr, and as a priest didst shepherd the flock of Christ, chastening and guiding it to salvation, O Eutyches, much-suffering athlete.

Having shaken off soul-destroying delusion through the power of the divine Spirit, thou didst come to Christ, leading to Him multitudes of those saved by faith through thine honored and godly preaching, O Eutyches, adornment of sufferers.

How beautiful are thy feet which walked the path of divine knowledge and trod well therein, and attained unto the broad expanse of the kingdom of heaven, O all-blessed and glorious martyr!

*Theotokion:* O Virgin Maiden and Mother, who gavest birth in the flesh unto the Unapproachable One! O Bride of God, glory of the angels and wounding of demons: vouchsafe divine healing unto my heart which is wounded by sin.

**Ode VI**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Cleanse me, O Savior, for many are my transgressions; and lead me up from the abyss of evils, I pray, for to Thee have I cried, and Thou hast hearkened to me, O God of my salvation.

Receiving thine end for Christ in Ephesus, O wise one, thou didst depart from Ephesus a prisoner, and, adorned with sufferings in thy native land, didst find rest.

Being a beauteous and all-pure temple of God, O Eutyches, by grace thou didst destroy the vile temples of the idols, and hast ascended to the temple of heaven to stand before God.

The angel of God strengthened thee as thou didst walk the road, describing those things which would manifestly come to pass for thee who art the peer of the angels in spirit, except for the flesh, O Eutyches most rich.

*Theotokion:* O Virgin, set aright the wanderings of my mind and the grievous movements of the passions within my soul; and preserve me whole from those who ever assail me without mercy.

*Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin…”—*

As one who shared the throne of the apostles and as the adornment of holy hierarchs, O Eutyches, thou wast glorified in martyrdom, didst shine forth like the sun, illumining all, and didst dispel the profound night of ungodliness. Wherefore, we honor thee as a truly divine initiate of the mysteries of Christ.

*Ikos:* Abiding now with the choirs on high, O initiate of the mysteries of God, as a priest of God, a minister of heaven, a shepherd of shepherds, an invincible athlete, send down light upon me, and inspire me with discourse, that I may praise thy divine sufferings, thy persecutions and exemplary battles, the manfully endured breaking of thy bones and severing of thy members, for the sake of which thou hast been numbered with the angels, O blessed one, as a truly divine initiate of the mysteries of Christ.

**Ode VII**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Once, in Babylon, the fire stood in awe of the condescension of God; wherefore, the youths, dancing with joyous step in the furnace, as in a meadow, chanted: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

With a divine gesture thou didst extinguish the fire kindled for thy destruction, O divinely wise one; for thunder was heard from the sky, and flakes of snow descended, burying those who would not believe in Christ.

Mightily lacerated, thou didst exude a sweet-smelling myrrh, which was poured forth to perfume thy sufferings, O martyr. For, hastening to the Word and Creator, thou didst cry out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Thy life was blameless, thy torment was all-glorious, and the holy shrine of thy relics is salvific for all who have recourse thereto, gushing forth healings and taking away the defilement of many passions.

*Theotokion:* The honored prophets, perceiving from afar the ineffable depth of thy mystery, explained thy birthgiving to all in many ways, O Virgin, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

**Ode VIII**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Madly did the Chaldæan tyrant heat the furnace sevenfold for the pious ones; but, beholding them saved by a higher Power, he cried out to the Creator and Deliverer: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Him supremely for all ages!

Stretching forth thy hands to Christ our God, O glorious one, while wrestling with lions before the tribunal, thou didst remain unharmed, like Daniel the prophet before thee, having an angel by thy side ever protecting thee; and thou didst chant unceasingly: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

The wild beast prepared for the destruction of thee who had been bestially condemned by the iniquitous, prophesied with his mighty expression and proclaimed the mighty acts of Christ the Savior, astonishing those who cried out: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

Having passed through the great contest of martyrdom by the power and grace of God, rejoicing, thou didst receive the crown of victory, and wast enrolled among the choirs of all the apostles and martyrs, with whom thou criest out unceasingly: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

*Theotokion:* O most immaculate one, who alone didst clearly give birth to Life, enliven my soul which hath been slain by the sting of the serpent, and vouchsafe me to do the will of Him Who for our sake was born of thee, O Virgin, for I cry out: Ye priests, bless; ye people, exalt God supremely for all ages!

**Ode IX**
{{text_align=center}}

*Irmos:* Heaven was stricken with awe, and the ends of the earth were amazed, that God hath appeared in the flesh, and that thy womb became more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, the ranks of men and angels magnify thee as the Theotokos.

O divinely wise athlete, thou pourest forth divers healings and dost soothe grievous illnesses, truly receiving grace, having fought well and vanquished the enemy, O eminent among the martyrs, who dwellest with the angels.

Thou wast comely amid thy struggles, and hast made thine abode in the beautiful mansions, thy holy head having been cut off with the sword, thy head on which Jesus hath placed a magnificent crown of victory, O lamp of the Church, confirmation and boast of those who piously call thee blessed.

Thou didst crush the might of the wicked one, O all-praised athlete Eutyches, and like a youth didst hold the trophy of victory over him; and as an excellent victor thou dwellest now in the heavens, standing in splendor before the throne of the Trinity with great boldness.

Thy divine and radiant memory hath shone forth upon all more brightly than the sun, illumining those who ever faithfully and piously celebrate it with beams of splendor, O Eutyches; and thereon we also pray that, as one possessed of boldness, thou entreat salvation for us.

*Theotokion:* Let us proclaim with the voice of Gabriel: Rejoice, O chosen land! Rejoice, golden table! Rejoice, refuge of men! Rejoice, boast of martyrs! Rejoice, O holy Theotokos, joy of the angels and might of those who with pure faith call thee blessed!

*Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women…”—*

As thou wast heir to the thrones and didst share the ways of the sacred apostles, O divinely wise one, shed light from heaven upon those who with faith celebrate thy holy suffering, in that thou art the disciple of the Word, O holy hierarch Eutyches.

*Glory…, Now & ever…: Theotokion—*

Look down upon thine inheritance, O pure one, and preserve it by thine invincible intercession. Establish and set aright the scepters of kingdoms, subdue the nations, and pour forth peace upon the ends of the earth.

