THE 26TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ADRIAN AND NATALIA

\(for this day we provide also the service in honor of the Vladimir Icon of the Theotokos\)

AT VESPERS

At “Lord, I have cried…,” these stichera, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs…”—

Beholding the all-honored suffering and the valiant feats of the martyrs, O glorious one, of thine own will thou gavest thyself over to struggles with manly mind, taking no pity on thy flesh for the sake of divine love. Wherefore, thou didst pass through valorous struggles, laying low the pride of the adversary, O patient-hearted Adrian.

Imprisoned in dungeons, beaten with thongs of oxhide, weighted down with irons, and crushed with stones, together with a multitude of martyrs, O glorious one, with them thou hast received the blessings of heaven, having as companion thy spouse Natalia who trusted in God, O valiant Adrian.

The spouse of Adam caused him to be driven from paradise through the counsel of the serpent; but Natalia all-wisely led Adrian to paradise with her sacred conversations, spurring him on with her teachings to endure painful sufferings, being a mediator for him of heavenly rewards and everlasting glory.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O holy couple, elect of the Lord! O eminent union blessed of God! O longed-for couple, beloved of Christ! Who doth not marvel, hearing of their deeds which transcend man? How did the female sex stand in manly manner against the arrogant tyrant and strengthen her husband, that he not give in to the wicked, but choose to die for the Faith rather than to live? O the divinely woven words of the all-wise Natalia! O the divine teachings which transcend the heavens and which set the glorious Adrian before the very throne of the great King Whom he acknowledged! O holy couple, pray to God for us who with love keep your memory, that we be delivered from temptations and all tribulations!

Now and ever…, Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside…”—

O all-pure Mistress, a sword pierced thy heart, as Simeon said, when thou beheldest Him Who shone forth from thee at the ineffable word of the Archangel as one condemned among transgressors, lifted up on the Cross, given vinegar and gall to drink, His side pierced, His hands and feet nailed; and thou didst exclaim, lamenting and crying out maternally: “What is this new mystery, O my Child most sweet?”

At the Aposticha, Glory…, the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone I,—

The zeal of a pious man drew his God-loving wife to splendid teaching; for the eminent Adrian was drawn on by the words of Natalia and finished the course of suffering. O the ways of the God-loving wife! For she did not bring her husband corruption as did Eve to Adam, but won never-ending life for him. Praising her with her husband, we cry out to Christ: Through Thy holy prayers grant us help!

Now & ever…, Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “Joy of the ranks of heaven…”—

Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, and beholding His longsuffering, weeping, thou didst say, O pure Mother: “Alas, O my Child most sweet, that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, O Word of God, that Thou mightest save mankind.”

Troparion, in Tone IV—

In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs have received imperishable crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at naught the tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our souls.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the martyrs, with 4 troparia, in Tone VI—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Traversing the deep on foot, as though it were dry land, and seeing the tyrant Pharaoh drowned, Israel cried aloud: Let us chant unto God a hymn of victory!

Through the supplications of Thy martyrs, O Christ God, raise me up to the light of repentance who am held fast by the wicked sleep of my deeds in the night of this life, that I may glorify Thee.

Illumined by the daybreak of the noetic Sun and having become children of the day, O martyrs, with might ye destroyed all the gloom of the idols.

Having tasted delight from lips that let drop the sweetness of divine wisdom, thou didst truly cast up the poison of thy former ignorance, O divinely blessed Adrian.

*Theotokion:* Having received thy Creator incarnate of thy seedless womb in manner past understanding, as He Himself desired, O pure one, thou hast truly been shown to be the Mistress of all created beings.

Ode III

*Irmos:* There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord my God, Who hast uplifted the horn of Thy faithful and established us on the rock of the confession of Thee, O Good One.

Escaping the bonds of the vanity of idolatry, O martyr, thou wast bound with a desire for the love of Christ, and with joy thou didst share the bonds of His athletes.

Your legs broken with iron bars, O athletes of the Lord, with bars of patience and valor ye truly broke the fetters of ungodliness.

Utterly disdaining carnal love, O Natalia, with desire for Christ thou didst enflame the soul of thy husband which was kindled with the fire of divine love.

*Theotokion:* Every rank of being exalteth the wonder of thy divine birthgiving, O pure one; for in supernatural manner thou didst conceive God in thy womb, and having given birth unto Him thou remainest Ever-virgin.

Kontakion, in Tone IV—

Having laid up in thy heart the divine words of thy divinely wise wife, O Adrian, martyr of Christ, thou didst earnestly rush to sufferings, receiving a crown with thy spouse.

Sessional hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Joseph marvelled...”—

Thou didst extinguish the pyre of ungodliness with the dew of piety, O athlete, and by the crushing of thy members didst break the might of the idols, acquiring thy spouse as an aide against all their cruel array; and with her thou hast made thine abode in the kingdom on high, O Adrian, mighty of soul. Entreat Christ, that He give mercy to those who honor thee.

Glory…, Now & ever…, Theotokion—

Tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of the passions, O pure one, I who am without conscience invoke thee fervently, that thou disdain me not lest I perish, wretch that I am, for other than thee I have no hope. Having set my hope on thee, let me not become the object of the delight or an occasion of the derision of the enemies of our salvation; for whatsoever thou desirest, thou canst do, in that thou art the Mother of the God of all.

Stavrotheotokion—

The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb Who was born of her without seed on the Cross, pierced by a spear, wounded with darts of grief, cried out in pain, exclaiming: “What is this new mystery? How is it that Thou diest, Who alone art the Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen forefather!”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* Christ is my power, my God and my Lord, the honored Church doth sing, crying out in godly manner with a pure mind, keeping festival in the Lord.

The martyrs, having acquired the might of Christ and truly trampled down the feeble imposture of the tyrants, received crowns of victory from heaven.

When sores covered the bodies of the saints, myrrh was truly offered to God, cleansing away the mighty sores of deception.

With thy blood thou didst dye a robe of incorruption for thyself, having shed the vesture of corruption, O Adrian; and thou now standest with glory before Christ.

*Theotokion:* Truly the mysteries of thy godly birthgiving are unutterable and ineffable for those on earth and in heaven, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.

Ode V

*Irmos:* With Thy divine light illumine the souls of those who with love rise at dawn unto Thee, O Good One, that they may know Thee, O Word of God, to be the true God Who calleth all forth from the darkness of sin.

By the might of the Trinity the two score and three valorous athletes, who now pray to Christ, loosed the bonds of impiety which was devoid of strength.

Standing like the sun amid brilliant stars, O Adrian, with the light of piety thou didst illumine those who struggled with thee; and dispelling the gloom of ungodliness, thou didst enlighten the ends of the earth.

The dew of thy precious words was truly healing for the pangs of thy spouse, who tasted of the love of higher things, O divinely wise Natalia, consort of martyrs.

*Theotokion:* O good Mistress of the world, save those who confess thee to be the Theotokos with all their soul; for thee, the true Theotokos, do we have as an invincible protection.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, fleeing to Thy calm haven I cry unto Thee: Lead up my life from corruption, O greatly Merciful One!

Guided in piety by the hand of Christ, ye traversed the deep of ungodliness and made haste to the calm haven of the radiance of the Most High, O athletes of Christ.

Thy victories, which transcended nature, perfume thy struggles like flowers, O wise one; for thou wast shown to be a fragrant censer of God, enkindled by the fire of torments, O Adrian.

Adorned with the beauty of faith was thy holy soul, O most honored Natalia, and seeking the beauty of Christ, which is truly infinite, thou didst attain thy desire.

*Theotokion:* O most honored Mistress, who for men gavest birth unto the Lord Pilot, still thou the constant and cruel tumult of my passions, and grant my heart peace.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared today...”—

The divine commemoration of the martyrs hath shone forth and radiantly illumined all the ends of the earth with the gladness of those who cry out: Thou art the joy of the martyrs, O Christ!

*Ikos:* The two score and three warrior martyrs, valiantly desiring Christ the King, Who was nailed to the tree of the Cross in the flesh, ardently endured cruel pangs and dreadful torments, trampling down all the ungodliness of the idols and setting at naught the opposition of the iniquitous. Wherefore, Adrian and Natalia, that comely pair, beholding them, emulated them, and, rejoicing, they cry out: Thou art the joy of the martyrs, O Christ!

Ode VII

*Irmos:* The Angel caused the furnace to pour forth dew upon the pious youths, and the command of God, which consumed the Chaldæans, prevailed upon the tyrant to cry out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Ye were shown to be invincible pillars of the heavenly Sion, O martyrs, having cast down all the foundations of the enemy in the endurance of your suffering. Wherefore, we ever piously honor your memory.

Natalia was given to Adrian by God as a helpmate united with him in soul, drawing him forth who was stuck fast in the abyss of deception and urging him to cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

Hiding the hand of the martyr as a precious treasure, O honored one, guided by the hand of the God of our fathers, thou didst not give the wealth of thy chastity over to adorn those who made an attempt on it.

*Theotokion:* The sacred prophets openly proclaimed beforehand the mystery of thine honorable birthgiving, O pure one; and we, gazing upon its fulfillment from afar, now piously call thee blessed.

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* From the flame didst Thou pour forth dew upon the venerable ones, and didst consume the sacrifice of the righteous one with water; for Thou, O Christ, dost do all things soever Thou desirest. Thee do we exalt supremely for all ages!

Wholly consumed by the fire of torment, O athletes, with your blood ye quenched all the flame of ungodliness, crying aloud: Thee do we exalt supremely forever, O Christ!

Who will not marvel at the wondrous woman’s love for God? For she disdained carnal desire and persuaded her spouse to honor and glorify Christ for all ages.

A pillar of piety wast thou for the faithful, O most blessed Adrian, martyr and athlete, having put to shame the vanities of the godless and desired the beauty of Christ.

*Theotokion:* Thou didst conceive the Word, the Bestower of light, through light, giving birth ineffably to the Transcendent One; for the Spirit of God made His abode within thee, O Virgin. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O pure one, forever.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* It is not possible for men to behold God, upon Whom the ranks of angels dare not gaze; but through thee, O most pure one, hath the Word appeared incarnate unto men; and magnifying Him with the armies of heaven, we call thee blessed.

Neither the crushing of your members, nor the threat of cruel tortures, nor the sword, nor fire, nor the death of your corruptible flesh, were in any wise able to separate you from the love of Christ, O glorious martyrs. Wherefore, ye ever rejoice with Him forever.

Ye were shown to be lamps of divine radiance, brilliant stars, beacons shining upon us the light of piety, rays of the Sun of glory, children of never-waning blessedness, O all-honored martyrs of Christ.

A wellspring full of the waters of the Spirit, a river full of divine gifts, and a cup pouring forth streams of suffering, were ye shown to be, O martyrs, delivering us from the tempest of divers temptations.

*Theotokion:* Resurrection hath now been given to the dead through thine unutterable and ineffable birthgiving, O most pure Theotokos; for Life, clad in the flesh He received from thee, hath shone forth upon all and hath manifestly destroyed the gloom of death.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Hearken, ye women...”—

Let the most wise Adrian, the confirmation of athletes, and the honorable Natalia, be honored with hymns as is meet. With them the holy company of martyrs shineth forth. And celebrating their radiant festival with pious intent, we hymn them with divine hymnody.

Theotokion—

The Author of creation and Fashioner of nature, Who in thy womb laid low the tyrant serpent who of old in Eden begrudged me deification, hath as God destroyed it by His Cross and death, pouring forth upon me incorruption.

