THE 27TH DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST

COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER PŒMEN THE GREAT

AT VESPERS

At “Lord, I have cried…,” these stichera, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel: “What shall we call you…”—

What now shall we call thee, O Pœmen? Model of monks and accomplisher of healings, who with the stripes of abstinence wounded the passions of the soul, citizen of heaven and converser with angels, inhabitant of the city on high, vessel of the virtues and confirmation of the pious. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

What now shall we declare thee, O Pœmen? Dweller in the desert and lover of stillness, uprooter of the passions, instructor of monks, deluge of the teachings of the divine Spirit, perpetual lamp of discernment, true worker of wonders who healest divers sufferings. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

As a beacon of discernment, thou dost illumine the souls that approach thee with faith, showing them the path of life, O wise one. Wherefore, we bless thee with praises, celebrating thy holy solemnity, O Pœmen, boast of the fathers, adornment of fasters. Pray thou that our souls be saved.

Glory…, in Tone VI—

O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward for thy labors in the heavens. Thou didst destroy legions of demons and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our souls.

Now and ever…, Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “On the third day…”—

Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, she that gave birth to Thee cried out: “What strange mystery is this that I see, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest in the flesh, suspended on the Tree, O Bestower of life?”

At the Aposticha, Glory…, in Tone VIII: Idiomelon—

We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Pœmen our father; for by thy steps have we truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, who sharest the portion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that He have mercy upon our souls.

Now and ever…, Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel: “O all-glorious wonder…”—

The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb outstretched of His own will upon the tree of the Cross, cried out maternally, lamenting and in pain: “O my Son, what is this strange sight? How is it that Thou diest Who as Lord givest life to all, O Longsuffering One, bestowing resurrection upon mortal man? I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!”

Troparion, in Tone VIII—

With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, and with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, and becamest a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. O Pœmen our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.

At Matins

Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the venerable one, with four troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII—

Ode I

*Irmos:* Let us chant unto the Lord, Who led His people through the Red Sea, for He alone hath gloriously been glorified.

Warmed by the fervor of the Comforter, O father, thy heart hath melted the ice of the demons and the winter of the passions.

Setting the tinder of the passions afire with the burning coal of God, thou becamest a beacon of discernment and fiery dispassion, O blessed one.

Bearing thy cross upon thy shoulders, O father, thou didst follow after Him Who calleth with love, and didst become a beacon for monks.

*Theotokion:* The all-divine Word, Who in His goodness desired to become incarnate of thy womb, O pure Virgin Mother, saveth the whole of me.

Ode III

*Irmos:* Thou art the confirmation of those who have recourse to Thee, O Lord; Thou art the light of the benighted; and my spirit doth hymn Thee.

The angels marvelled at thy standing all night; for thou didst have them as fellow laborers in thy prayers to God.

Thou didst strip the blindness of the passions from the eyes of thy mind; wherefore, in pure manner thou hast beheld the Invisible One.

Nurtured on abstinence as with milk, O venerable Pœmen, thou didst mount the heights of the virtues to perfect dispassion.

*Theotokion:* Having thee as my helper, O pure one, I fear not the assaults of the enemy; yea, having thee as mine intercessor, I vanquish their hosts.

Sessional hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel: “Of the divine Faith…”—

Tended by the Lord, thou wast shown to be His meek sheep, overcoming the adverse wolves, O blessed one; and having completed thy divine contest, thou madest thine abode in the fold of heaven, O venerable one. Earnestly entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.

Glory…, Now and ever…, Theotokion—

The one Lord, Who preserved thee, His Mother, a Virgin undefiled after thy birthgiving, as thou wast before giving birth, remained God without separating Himself from His divine nature while He took flesh in thy womb, becoming man. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy.

Stavrotheotokion—

The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended on the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou sufferest of Thine own will, desiring to deliver man from the infamy of the passions?”

Ode IV

*Irmos:* I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy dispensation; I have understood Thy works, and have glorified Thy divinity.

Thou wast an unflawed mirror receiving the brilliance of the Spirit, and the receptacle of the divine ascents, O God-bearer.

Thou wast shown to be a lofty tree watered with tears, adorned with abstinence and laden with divine fruits, O father.

With the pangs of abstinence thou didst work the field of thy mind, and didst raise as thy crop the grain-laden wheat of the virtues and the grace of miracles.

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God, vessel of virginity and habitation of the infinite Essence: enlighten my darkened soul.

Ode V

*Irmos:* Waking at dawn, we cry to Thee: Save us, O Lord! For Thou art our God, and we know none other than Thee.

Having borne the heat of the day, O glorious and venerable one, thou wast accounted worthy of the joy of thy Lord.

Thou didst bud forth the sweet smelling lily of the valley of abstinence, rendering the ends of the earth fragrant with exhalations of the knowledge of God.

Fortifying with humility, O father, thou didst cast down to the ground the serpent who greatly boasted in the beginning.

*Theotokion:* We hymn thee, O Theotokos, as a Virgin after giving birth; for thou gavest birth for the world unto the Word in the flesh.

Ode VI

*Irmos:* Grant me a robe of light, O Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

Having mortified the assaults of the body with many struggles, thou didst depart for immortal life, O right wondrous Pœmen.

Ever acquiring abstinence, prayer and love unfeigned, O venerable one, thou wast shown to be an unflawed mirror of God.

Living in impassable deserts, thou didst strip thyself bare of vain passions and becamest a citizen of heaven.

*Theotokion:* O thou who alone gavest birth in the flesh unto the Word at the word of the Archangel, deliver our souls, we pray thee, from the snares of the enemy.

Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel: “Thou hast appeared...”—

Today the holy memory of thy splendid struggles hath dawned, O father, gladdening the souls of the pious, O divinely wise Pœmen, our venerable father.

*Ikos:* Hating soul-corrupting pleasures and the tumult of the world with all thy soul, and desiring Christ, taking His Cross on thy shoulders, thou didst follow after Him with steadfast desire; and having struggled in abstinence, fasting, tears and unceasing prayer, thou didst acquire an immaterial life. Wherefore, the Savior hath given thee the kingdom of heaven, counting thee worthy of the never-waning light and unapproachable radiance, O divinely wise Pœmen, our venerable father.

Ode VII

*Irmos:* In the furnace the Hebrew children boldly trod the flame underfoot and transformed the fire into dew, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!

Passing thy time in divine visions and illumining thyself with immaterial splendors, thou hast truly been shown to be forever a child of the day and the light of those who are in darkness, O God-bearer.

Taken up to the heights of dispassion in the flesh, emulating the angels, thou becamest an heir to paradise, O blessed one, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Shining with the splendor of dispassion, thou didst cast the temptations of the demons into darkness. From their many afflictions deliver those who cry out, O venerable one: Blessed art Thou, O God!

*Theotokion:* Behold, in the Spirit the great Isaiah said of the Virgin that she would conceive God in her womb and give birth unto Him. Chanting, let us say unto Him: Blessed art Thou, O God!

Ode VIII

*Irmos:* The unoriginate King of glory, before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, hymn, ye priests, and exalt supremely for all ages!

Having kept the lamp of thy soul lit with the oil of thy struggles without slumbering, thou didst enter into the incorrupt bridal chamber with joy, and livest forever.

The pillars of thy soul were not shaken by the winds of unclean spirits; for thou wast established upon the rock of the Faith, O most blessed God-bearer.

Thou didst shed the abominable robe of the passions and didst clothe thyself in the comely raiment of divine dispassion, reigning with Christ.

*Theotokion:* O ye people, let us hymn her who alone hath been preserved a Virgin after giving birth, in that she is the honored and all-exalted throne of God Most High.

Ode IX

*Irmos:* Every ear trembleth to hear of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willingly came down even to the flesh, becoming man through the Virgin’s womb. Wherefore we, the faithful, magnify the all-pure Theotokos.

Thou didst set like a star, away from the world, yet hast shone forth in Christ, the truly noetic Sun of righteousness, O blessed one; and thy brilliant virtues, which remove the darkness from souls, thou hast left to the faithful as radiance.

Precious in the sight of God was thy death, O glorious one; for thou didst live venerably on earth, keeping His commandments and precepts inviolate, O Pœmen. Wherefore, the never-waning Light hath shone forth upon thee, in that thou art a righteous man.

Delighting in divine beauty, deified by partaking thereof, and standing now, illumined, before the great Light, O father, with extreme desire thou didst most clearly draw nigh thereto. O Pœmen, remember those who honor thee and keep thy memory.

*Theotokion:* O Bride of God, thou alone among women didst abolish the curse of the first-created, having given birth unto the Uncircumscribed One circumscribed in the flesh; and thou, O undefiled one, hast renewed the laws of nature which were set aside in the beginning, and hast brought them together by thine all-glorious mediation.

Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “The heaven with stars...”—

Desiring the life of the angels, thou didst depart into the desert, O Pœmen, and didst subdue the passions of the flesh; and thou wast shown to be an equal of the angels, O our God-bearing father.

Theotokion—

With thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all thy servants unharmed by the assaults of the enemy; for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge amid our necessities.

At Liturgy

Prokimenon, in Tone VII—

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.

*Stichos:* What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?

Reading from the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Galatians, §213 \(5:22-6:2\).

Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

Alleluia, in Tone VI—

Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he greatly rejoice.

*Stichos:* His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.

Reading from the Gospel according to Matthew, §10 \(4:25-5:12\).

At that time, there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you.”

Communion Verse—

In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

